Cambridge 
IGCSE® and O Level 
Paul Hoang
Margaret Ducie Economics
Second edition
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   1 14/02/18   8:37 AMThe questions, example answers, marks awarded and/or comments that appear in this book were written by the 
authors. In examination, the way marks would be awarded to answers like these may be different.
Every effort has been made to trace all copyright holders, but if any have been inadvertently overlooked, the 
Publishers will be pleased to make the necessary arrangements at the first opportunity.
Although every effort has been made to ensure that website addresses are correct at time of going to press, Hodder 
Education cannot be held responsible for the content of any website mentioned in this book. It is sometimes possible to find a relocated web page by typing the address of the home page for a website in the URL window of your browser.
Hachette UK’s policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable and recyclable products and made from wood grown 
in sustainable forests. The logging and manufacturing processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the country of origin.
Orders: please contact Bookpoint Ltd, 130 Park Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4SE. Telephone: (44) 01235 827720.  
Fax: (44) 01235 400401. Email education@bookpoint.co.uk Lines are open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday to Saturday, 
with a 24-hour message answering service. You can also order through our website: www.hoddereducation.com
ISBN: 978 1 5104 2127 1® IGCSE is a registered trademark
© Paul Hoang and Margaret Ducie 2018
First published in 2013 by  
Hodder Education, An Hachette UK Company Carmelite House 50 Victoria Embankment London EC4Y 0DZ
This second edition published 2018Impression number
 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Year 2022  2021  2020  2019  2018
All rights reserved. Apart from any use permitted under UK copyright law, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or held within any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher or under licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Further details of such licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited, www.cla.co.uk
Cover photo © Shutterstock/JianghaistudioTypeset in IndiaPrinted in SloveniaA catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library.The authors would like to dedicate this book to their children: 
Salvador, Gino and Isidora Boon Jake and Luke Hoang
The authors would like to thank their spouses, Derek Boon and Kin Hoang,  
for their patience, understanding and support.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   2 08/02/18   1:41 PMContents
Introduction  iv
How to use this book  iv
Exam preparation and technique  vi
	 SECTION 	1	 The 	basic 	economic 	problem
 1 The nature of the economic problem  2
 2 The factors of production  6
 3 Opportunity cost  11
 4 Production possibility curve  14
	 SECTION 	2	 The 	allocation 	of	resources
 5 Microeconomics and macroeconomics  20
 6 The role of markets in allocating resources  24
 7 Demand  28
 8 Supply  34
 9 Price determination  39
10 Price changes  42
11 Price elasticity of demand  46
12 Price elasticity of supply  57
13 Market economic system  63
14 Market failure  67
15 Mixed economic system  73
	 SECTION 	3	 Microeconomic 	decision 	makers
16 Money and banking  86
17 Households  96
18 Workers  108
19 Trade unions  123
20 Firms  130
21 Firms and production  145
22 Firms’ costs, revenue and objectives  155
23 Market structure  162
	 SECTION 	4	 Government 	and	the	macro 	economy
24 The role of government  170
25 The macroeconomic aims of government  173
26 Fiscal policy  178
27 Monetary policy  189
28 Supply-side policy  193
29 Economic growth  198
30 Employment and unemployment  206
31 Inflation and deflation  216
	 SECTION 	5	 Economic 	development
32 Living standards  230
33 Poverty  235
34 Population  243
35 Differences in economic development between countries  254
	 SECTION 	6	 International 	trade 	and	globalisation
36 International specialisation  262
37 Globalisation, free trade and protection  267
38 Foreign exchange rates  276
39 Current account of balance of payments  284
Additional exam-style questions  293
Glossary  297
Acknowledgements  302
Index  303
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   3 24/01/18   1:40 PMiv 
Introduction
This book has been written for all students of Cambridge IGCSE ® and O Level 
Economics. It carefully and precisely follows the syllabus from Cambridge 
Assessment International Education. It provides the detail and guidance that are needed to support you throughout the course and help you prepare for your examinations. It will also be of great use to anyone who wants to learn more about the key concepts of economics. 
This book will be valuable to students of economics whether you are:
»	studying the subject for the first time at school or college and need a comprehensive and clearly written textbook
»	revising the subject before your examinations and need a study guide to help you with key definitions, techniques and examination advice
»	studying the subject on your own through distance or open learning and need a complete programme of supportive questions and activities with suggested answers.
Building on the successful formula of the previous edition, this second edition updates all existing chapters. Material that is no longer covered by the syllabus has been removed and new subject material has been added, with additional chapters and new features.
This book has been written with the international student in mind. It explains 
economic theory using real-life examples and case studies from around the world.
How to use this book
To make your study of economics as rewarding and successful as possible, this Cambridge-endorsed textbook offers the following important features:
Learning 	objectives
Each chapter starts with an outline of the subject material to be covered and ends with a checklist to confirm what you should have learned and understood.
Organisation
The content is in the same order as the syllabus: chapter titles and chapter section headings match those of the Cambridge IGCSE® and O Level Economics syllabuses.
Approach
The subject material is written in an informative yet lively way that allows complete understanding of each topic to be gained.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   4 24/01/18   1:40 PMv 
Answers
Answers to the exam-style and chapter review questions are available in
the accompanying online Teacher Guide. 
Policies to alleviate poverty and redistribute income
241» Improving education — government provision of education can help to alleviate poverty. By improving access to education for everyone, it narrows the gap between the rich and the poor. In most cases, a person’s level of education tends to affect their earnings and earning potential (see Table 18.3). Over time, policies to increase the quantity and quality of education in the economy will help to improve the human capital and productive capacity of the country, thereby creating economic growth and lowering poverty. Similarly, the provision of and increased access to other essential services, such as healthcare/uni00A0and housing, will also help.
» Providing more generous state beneﬁ  ts — government provision of welfare beneﬁ  ts gives ﬁ  nancial assistance to enable the unemployed and disadvantaged to meet their basic needs. Examples of such payments include: unemployment beneﬁ  t, state pension funds for the elderly, and child beneﬁ  t (to reduce child poverty). State beneﬁ  ts help to redistribute income and alleviate poverty by ensuring every citizen has access to basic necessities. Macroeconomic policies aimed at reducing unemployment (see/uni00A0Chapter 30) also help, because unemployment is a major cause of poverty and inequality. Examples are government incentives to attract foreign direct investment and government-funded job creation and retraining/uni00A0schemes.
» Using progressive taxation — progressive tax systems (see Chapter 26) reduce the gap between the rich and poor members of a country. Higher-income groups pay a higher percentage of their incomes in tax, with the tax proceeds being used by the government to support lower-income groups or those without any income. This is a common method used to alleviate poverty and redistribute income and wealth in society.
» Introducing (or increasing) a national minimum wage — the introduction of a national minimum wage, or imposing a higher minimum wage rate (see Chapter 18), can improve the standard of living for low-income households. Hence, such policies help to alleviate poverty in the economy.
Activity
a Produce a short piece of writing of 500–750 words entitled ‘A day in the life’ of a 
teenager living in a LEDC of your choice.
b You need to gather the necessary data and information before you begin your writing.
c Your work must reﬂ  ect the macroeconomic indicators, without actually mentioning 
the indicators by name.
d This can be in the format of an essay, diary entry, magazine article or letter.
Be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with your teacher and classmates.
Activity
a
 Produce a short piece of writing of 500–750 words entitled ‘A day in the life’ of a 
teenager living in a LEDC of your choice.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by poverty and what are the signs that there is poverty in the 
economy?
2 How does absolute poverty differ from relative poverty?
3 What are the main causes of poverty?4 Why does an overreliance on primary sector output hinder the growth of low-income 
countries?
5 What are the main policies that can be used to alleviate poverty and redistribute 
income in the economy?
11
 3  Opportunity cost
Opportunity cost
Opportunity cost is a very important concept in the study of economics. Opportunity cost is the cost of the next best opportunity forgone (given up) when making economic decisions. Every choice made has an opportunity cost because in most cases there is an alternative.
Some examples of opportunity cost are as follows:
» The opportunity cost of choosing to study IGCSE Economics is another IGCSE 
subject you could be studying instead.
» The opportunity cost of visiting the cinema on Saturday night could be the 
money you would have earned from babysitting for your neighbour instead of going to the cinema.» The opportunity cost of visiting the cinema on Saturday night could be the 
money you would have earned from babysitting for your neighbour instead of going to the cinema.
» The opportunity cost of building an additional airport terminal is using the 
same government funds to build public housing for low-income families.
» The opportunity cost of a school purchasing 100 laptops for use in classrooms 
might be the science equipment that could not be bought as a result.
» The opportunity cost of going to university to study for a degree is the loss in 
income that would have been earned if the undergraduate student had chosen to work instead.
Case study: US federal government spendingAccording to the Federal Ministry of Finance, the US federal government announced 
spending of almost $329 billion in its 2017 budget on the following:
• 42.2% on labour and social affairs
• 11.1% on national defence• 8.2% on transport and digital infrastructure• 6.1% on federal debts• 5.3% on education and research• 4.6% on healthcare
The government raises a ﬁ  nite amount of taxation revenue and must decide how much 
of the budget to allocate to each area of public spending. There is an opportunity cost attached to the decisions made as increased spending in one area may lead to decreased spending in another.
Activity
Investigate the major components of government spending in your country, or a country 
of your choice. Be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with others in the class.
Activity
Investigate the major components of government spending in your country, or a country 
of your choice. Be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with others in the class.
Deﬁ  nition
Opportunity cost is the cost 
of the next best opportunity forgone when making a decision.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne and provide examples of opportunity cost
★ understand the inﬂ  uence of opportunity cost on decision making.
Influences on household borrowing
107Chapter review questions
1 What are the main factors that affect the level of consumer spending in an economy?
2 How will the spending, borrowing and saving patterns of a young family with two 
children under the age of 5 compare with those of an old-aged pensioner?
3 How do spending and saving patterns of low income earners differ from those of high 
income earners?
4 How does wealth affect a person’s level of spending, saving and borrowing?5 How do changes in interest rates inﬂ  uence consumer spending, saving and 
borrowing?
6 What are the main determinants of the level of savings in an economy?7 What factors affect the level of borrowing in an economy?8 Why might one person save more of their income than another?
Revision checklist
✔ The amount of money that individuals spend on goods and services is 
largely dependent upon their level of disposable income.
✔ Disposable income is the amount of income a person has available 
to spend on goods and services after compulsory deductions such as 
income tax.
✔ Direct taxation reduces the amount of disposable income and therefore 
the amount of spending and saving in the economy.
✔ Current expenditure is money spent on goods and services consumed 
within the current year . Capital expenditure is money spent on ﬁ  xed assets.
✔ The wealth of an individual is measured by the amount of assets they 
own minus their liabilities (the amount they owe). A positive wealth effect causes people to spend more.
✔ Apart from levels of income, other determinants of the level of spending 
include: interest rates, conﬁ  dence levels, inﬂ  ation, age and the size of households.
✔ Saving occurs when a person puts away part of their current income for 
future spending.
✔ Determinants of saving include: the level of disposable income, age, 
attitudes towards saving, conﬁ  dence levels and interest rates.
✔ Borrowing occurs when an individual, ﬁ  rm or the government takes outattitudes towards saving, conﬁ  dence levels and interest rates.
✔ Borrowing occurs when an individual, ﬁ  rm or the government takes out 
a loan, paying it back to the ﬁ  nancial lender over a period of time, with interest payments.
✔ Factors that affect the level of borrowing in an economy include: the level 
of disposable income, interest rates, conﬁ  dence levels, the availability of funds (money supply), credit (including store cards) and wealth.
 The amount of money that individuals spend on goods and services is 
Labour-intensive and capital-intensive production
149Exam-style questions
Study the hypothetical data below for two ﬁ  rms and answer the questions that follow. The ﬁ  gures show the amount of money spent by each industry on factors of production.
Firm Labour costs ($) Capital costs ($) Other costs ($)
A 20,000 10,000 10,000
B 40,000 40,000 20,000
a Deﬁ  ne labour-intensive production. [2]
b Use the data above to explain why Firm A might be considered to be more 
labour intensive than Firm B, despite the latter spending twice as much on labour costs. [4]
Capital-intensive production
Capital-intensive production takes place if a ﬁ  rm spends more on capital costs than on any other factor of production. This includes expenditure on capital equipment such as tools, equipment, machinery and vehicles. Therefore, ﬁ  rms operating capital-intensive production need a lot of money to fund their activities. This can act as a barrier to entry since it proves expensive for new ﬁ  rms to enter such industries. Examples are aircraft and motor vehicle manufacturers, soft drinks production and oil extraction.
▲ There are signiﬁ  cant entry barriers into the car and aircraft manufacturing industries
Despite the initially high costs of capital-intensive production, there are potentially huge cost savings in the form of technological economies of scale in the long run (see Chapter 20). Firms that become more capital intensive 
Deﬁ  nition
In capital-intensive 
industries, the use and cost of capital is more prominent than that of any other factor of production, e.g. car manufacturing.Activity	
Activities	appear	throughout	the	book	
and	encourage	you	to	investigate	real-life	applications	of	economics	as	a	dynamic	subject	in	your	local	environment	as	well	as	globally.Revision	checklist	
This	checklist	lists	the	key	concepts	and	topics	you	have	covered	in	the	chapter	and	the	key	points	you	need	to	know	for	examinations.
Exam-style	questions	
These	exam-style	questions	are	designed	to	show	you	the	types	of	question	you	may	get	in	examinations.	Note	that	the	questions	within	the	chapters	are	only	part	questions,	as	they	are	intended	to	consolidate	understanding	of	the	speciﬁ 	c	chapter	being	reviewed.	Some	complete	questions	are	given	in	the	section	‘Additional	exam-style	questions’	at	the	end	of	the	book.
Case	study
Case	studies	based	on	a	range	of	international	businesses/examples	put	concepts	into	a	real-world	context	to	help	you	understand	and	think	about	how	they	work	in	practice.Study	tips
Study	tips	encourage	critical	thinking	and	emphasise	that	you	need	to	be	able	to	present	and	justify	an	opinion,	underpinned	by	economic	principles	and	theories.	
Chapter	review	questions	
These	questions,	which	correspond	with	the	chronological	order	of	the	text,	encourage	you	to	read,	reﬂ 	ect	and	write	your	own	answers.
Government intervention to address market failure
77» It generates tax revenue for the government which can be used to fund 
important goods and services.
The disadvantages of imposing an indirect tax on a good or service are as follows:
» The demand for cigarettes, alcohol and petrol (gas for a car) tends to be price 
inelastic, which means that the increase in price may have little impact on the 
consumption level of many people. In the case of cigarettes, the nicotine in cigarettes makes smoking highly addictive and therefore most smokers will pay the higher price, so consumption will change only slightly.» The indirect tax will be regressive (see Chapter 26), so will have a greater 
impact on low income earners than high income earners.
Exam-style questions
Trafﬁ  c congestion in central London has fallen since the introduction of a 
congestion charge for driving into the central business district. It costs £11.50 (approximately $15) each day to drive into the restricted area during peak hours (between 7 a.m. and 6 p.m. on weekdays). There is a penalty of between £65 (around $85) and £195 ($250) for late payment of the charge.
a Explain, using an example, an external cost of driving a car. 
[2]b Analyse the advantages and disadvantages of the congestion charge for 
two different stakeholders. 
[6]c Discuss whether you think the congestion charge is a long-term or 
short-term solution to the problem of trafﬁ  c congestion in London. [8]
Subsidies
Governments often provide subsidies to encourage the consumption of certain goods 
and services. For example, public transport might be subsidised to discourage people from using private cars. Figure 15.5 shows the impact of a subsidy on the market for 
public transport. The bus and railway ﬁ  rms receive a sum of money from the government which lowers their production costs and causes the supply curve to shift from S
1 (before subsidy) to S
2 (after subsidy). Price falls from P
1 to P2 and the quantity demanded increases from Q
1 to Q2. An increase in the use of public 
transport should lower congestion, and reduce the amount of pollution caused by driving cars. Therefore, the subsidy reduces external costs created by driving.
Case study: Flu vaccines in Hong KongThe Hong Kong government subsidises the cost of annual ﬂ  u vaccines for the very young 
and the elderly to encourage people in high-risk age groups to get vaccinated. The aim is to reduce the amount of ﬂ  u in the wider community by targeting these age groups, so that fewer people need to be hospitalised for the treatment of ﬂ  u. Vaccinations create positive spillover effects for the rest of the economy and result in less pressure on healthcare services.
Quantity of public transportQ1Q2S2S1
Price ofpublic
transport ($)P1
Dsubsidy
P2
O
▲ Figure 15.5 The effects of a producer subsidyStudy tip
The level of a subsidy is 
measured by the vertical distance between the two supply curves. The producer receives payment from the government and passes some of this income to consumers in the form of lower prices (shown by the distance between P
1 and P2 in Figure 15.5) and keeps the remainder.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   77
24/01/18   1:37 PMDeﬁ 	nitions
Deﬁ 	nitions	of	the	key	term	to	help	you	develop	your	use	of	economics	terminology.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   5 24/01/18   1:40 PMviExam preparation and technique
Revision
You should be able to perform to the best of your ability if you:
» ensure that you have worked through all the activities and examination-style 
questions in this book
» revise thoroughly before your examination — allow plenty of time for this and avoid leaving it until the last minute.
You can also help yourself greatly if you take the following steps.
» Obtain a copy of the syllabus. You should also be able to obtain past examination papers and mark schemes. It is important that you check the progress of your learning and revision by ticking off each topic against the syllabus content.
» Make sure that you know the number and length of each of the papers you will have to sit. The style and nature of the questions often differ between papers, so you must be clear about the types of question that are likely to appear on each paper.
For Cambridge IGCSE
® and O Level Economics the examination papers are:
Length Type 	of	paper Type 	of	questions
Paper 	1 45 	min Data 	response 30 	multiple-choice 	questions
Paper 	2 2 	hours 	15	min Structured 	
questionsStudents 	answer 	one	compulsory 	
questions 	and	three 	questions 	from 	a	
choice 	of	four
Make sure you check the instructions on the question paper, the length of the paper and the number of questions you have to answer.
Allocate your time sensibly between each question. Every year, good students 
let themselves down by spending too long on some questions and too little time (or no time at all) on others. You will be expected to spend longer writing an answer to a question worth 12 marks than you would when writing an answer worth 8 marks.
Remember that the most common command words are ‘identify’, ‘explain’, 
‘consider’ and ‘justify’. The following guide should help you.
Key	command 	words 	you	need 	to	know
Analyse — examine in detail to show meaning, identify elements and the 
relationship between them.
Calculate — work out from given facts, figures or information.Define — give precise meaning.Describe — state the points of a topic/give characteristics and main features.Discuss — write about issue(s) or topic(s) in depth in a structured way.Explain — set out purposes or reasons / make the relationships between things 
evident / provide why and/or how and support with relevant evidence.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   6 24/01/18   1:40 PMvii 
Give — produce an answer from a given source or recall/memory. 
Identify — name/select/recognise.State — express in clear terms.
Finally... 	
Economics can help to explain real-world events, issues and problems, such  as why:
» the most expensive can of Coca-Cola, made for astronauts, is $1250 per can
» one of the world’s fastest cars, the Bugatti Veyron, is priced at a cool  $1.7 million (before taxes)
» the price of a bus fare is relatively low
» the average doctor, lawyer, pilot and dentist have high earnings
» private sector firms do not supply street lighting and public roads
» diamonds (a non-essential product) are expensive, whereas water (a vital good) is not
» farm workers (who harvest products essential for life) are paid low wages whereas bankers (who produce nothing of real substance) are paid high salaries
Economics helps to explain everyday issues that occur in a constantly changing 
global environment. It is a ‘live’ subject and you are encouraged to watch the news and read newspapers to refresh the case studies you learn in class.
Enjoy the course and using this book!
Paul Hoang and Margaret Ducie
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_FM.indd   7 24/01/18   1:40 PMThis page intentionally left blank1
SECTION 1
The basic 
economic problem
Chapters
1 The nature of the economic problem
2 The factors of production3 Opportunity cost4 Production possibility curve
This section of the syllabus introduces students to the 
fundamental economic problem: scarce resources but inﬁ  nite wants (desires). You will learn about the introductory concepts that underpin the study of economics including the basic economic problem, scarcity, choice, factors of production, economic goods and free goods, opportunity cost and production possibilities.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   1 24/01/18   9:54 AM2
 1  The nature of the economic 
problem
The nature of the economic problem: ﬁ  nite 
resources and unlimited wants
In every country, resources are limited in supply and decisions have to be made 
by governments, fi  rms (businesses) and individuals about how to allocate scarce resources to satisfy their unlimited needs and wants. This is known as the basic economic problem, which exists in every economy: how best to allocate scarce resources to satisfy people’s unlimited needs and wants. Essentially, economics is the study of how resources are allocated to satisfy the unlimited needs and wants of individuals, governments and fi  rms in an economy.
+ =limited
resourcesscarcity unlimited
wants
▲ Figure 1.1 The real cause of the economic problem
The three main economic agents (or decision makers) in an economy are:
» individuals or households
» fi  rms (businesses which operate in the private sector of the economy)
» the government.
The three basic economic questions addressed by economic agents are:
1 What to produce?
2 How to produce it?
3 For whom to produce it?
Firms and individuals produce goods and services in the private sector of the 
economy and the government produces goods and services in the public sector. For example, the government might provide education and healthcare services for the general public. All economic agents (governments, fi  rms and individuals) produce and consume goods and services.
Activity
Discuss how a private ﬁ  rm producing running shoes would answer the three basic 
economic questions.
Activity
Discuss how a private ﬁ  rm producing running shoes would answer the three basic 
economic questions.
Deﬁ  nition
The basic economic 
problem is concerned with how best to allocate scarce resources in order to satisfy people’s unlimited needs and wants.
Deﬁ  nitions
Economic agents are households (private individuals in society), ﬁ  rms that operate in the private sector of an economy and the government (the public sector of an economy).Private sector refers to economic activity of private individuals and ﬁ  rms. The private sector’s main aim is to earn proﬁ  t for its owners.Public sector refers to economic activity directly involving the government, such as the provision of state education and healthcare services. The public sector’s main aim is to provide a service.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand the nature of the economic problem
★ explain ﬁ  nite resources and unlimited wants
★ distinguish between economic and free goods.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   2 24/01/18   9:54 AMThe nature of the economic problem: finite resources and unlimited wants
3Goods are physical items that can be produced, bought and sold. Examples are 
furniture, clothing, toothpaste and pencils. Services are non-physical items that can be provided by fi  rms and paid for by customers. Examples are haircuts, bus journeys, education, concerts, telephone calls and internet access.
Activities
1 Make a list of the goods and services provided by the public sector of your economy.
2 Identify the goods and services which are free to individuals and those for which you 
have to pay.
3 List which goods/services could be provided by a private ﬁ  rm as well as by the public 
(government) sector.
4 Compare and contrast the aims and objectives of a government-funded swimming 
pool and a private health and leisure club.
Activities
1
 Make a list of the goods and services provided by the public sector of your economy.
2
 Identify the goods and services which are free to individuals and those for which you 
Needs are the essential goods and services required for human survival. These 
include nutritional food, clean water, shelter, protection, clothing and access to healthcare and education. All individuals have a right to have these needs met and this is stated in Articles 25 and 26 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, drafted in December 1948.
Article 25
Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.Article 26Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
Wants are goods and services that are not necessary for survival but are human 
desires — that is, things we would like to have. Wants are unlimited as most people are rarely satisfi  ed with what they have and are always striving for more. Wants are a matter of personal choice and part of human nature.
World Bank fi  gures suggest that over 3 billion of the world’s inhabitants live on 
less than $2.50 per day and more than 1.3 billion live in extreme poverty (less than $1.25 a day). These fi  gures suggest that their basic needs are not being met. In contrast, the ten richest people on the planet have wealth equivalent to the poorest half of the world’s population. The study of economics can help to explain why this happens and offer possible solutions to the basic economic problem.
Activities
1 Make a list of your top 10 wants and needs. 
2 Are there any ‘needs’ that you could actually survive without?3 Are there any wants that might be considered as needs?4 Identify a shortage of any good or service in your economy. Explain why the shortage 
has occurred.
Activities
1
 Make a list of your top 10 wants and needs. 
2
 Are there any ‘needs’ that you could actually survive without?
Deﬁ  nitions
Goods are physical items 
such as tables, cars, toothpaste and pencils.Services are non-physical items such as haircuts, bus journeys, telephone calls and internet access.
Deﬁ  nitions
Needs are goods and services that are essential for survival.Wants are goods and services that are not necessary for survival but are demanded by economic agents to fulﬁ  l their desires.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   3 24/01/18   9:54 AM1 THE NATURE OF THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM
4Economic goods and free goods
An economic good is one which is limited in supply, such as oil, wheat, cotton, 
housing and cars. It is scarce in relation to the demand for the product, so human effort is required to obtain an economic good.
Free goods are unlimited in supply, such as the air, sea, rain water, sunlight 
and (to some extent) public domain webpages. There is no opportunity cost in the production or consumption of free goods.
A free good is not the same as a good that is provided without having to pay 
(such as education or healthcare services provided by the government). The latter has an opportunity cost (the money could have been spent on the provision of other goods and services) and is funded by taxpayers’ money.
Activity
Make a list of ten goods which are limited in supply (economic goods) and a second list 
of goods which are unlimited in supply (free goods). How many goods did your class think of that are unlimited in supply?
Activity
Make a list of ten goods which are limited in supply (economic goods) and a second list 
of goods which are unlimited in supply (free goods). How many goods did your class 
Exam-style questions
1 What is the basic economic problem faced by all societies?  [1]
A Achieving happiness
B An ineffi  cient economic systemC Rewarding factors of productionD Scarcity of resources
2 Which product is most likely to be classifi  ed as a free good?  [1]
A Birthday presentsB Public transportationC SeawaterD State (government-funded) education
Chapter review questions
1 What is economics the study of?
2 What is the difference between a need and a want?3 What is meant by the basic economic problem?4 What is meant by economic agents?5 What are the three fundamental questions that all economies face?6 What is the difference between goods and services?7 What is the difference between the private and public sector?8 How do economic goods differ from free goods? 
Deﬁ  nitions
Economic goods are those 
which are limited in supply.Free goods are goods which are unlimited in supply, such as air and seawater. Hence, there is no opportunity cost in terms of their output.
▲ An example of ‘free goods’
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   4 24/01/18   9:54 AMEconomic goods and free goods
5Revision checklist
✔ Economics is the study of how resources are allocated to satisfy the 
unlimited needs and wants of individuals, governments and ﬁ  rms in 
an economy.
✔ The basic economic problem is concerned with how best to allocate 
scarce resources in order to satisfy people’s unlimited needs and wants.
✔ Three fundamental questions arise from the basic economic problem: 
what, how and for whom should production take place?
✔ Economic agents comprise: individuals (households), businesses (ﬁ  rms) 
and the government.
✔ Firms and individuals produce goods and services in the private sector, 
whereas the government operates in the public sector .
✔ Goods are physical items that can be produced, bought and sold. Services 
are non-physical items that can be provided by ﬁ  rms and governments, and are usually paid for by customers.
✔ Needs are the essential goods and services required for human survival. 
✔ Wants are goods and services that are not necessary for survival but are 
human desires. These are inﬁ  nite.
✔ Economic goods are limited in supply, whereas free goods are unlimited 
in supply and so have no opportunity cost in terms of output and consumption.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   5 24/01/18   9:54 AM6
 2 The factors of production
Factors of production
Production of any good or service requires resources, known as the factors of 
production, which are divided into four categories:
» Land — the natural resources required in the production process, such as oil, coal, water, wood, metal ores and agricultural products.
» Labour — the human resources required in the production process, including skilled and unskilled labour.
» Capital — the manufactured resources required in the production process, such as machinery, tools, equipment and vehicles.
» Enterprise — the skills a business person requires to combine and manage the other three factors of production successfully.
▲ Factors of production: land, labour, enterprise and capital
For example, the factors of production required to produce cans of Coca-Cola are as follows:
» Capital — a factory building, machinery, computers, tools, and trucks to 
transport the drinks to warehouses and retailers.
Deﬁ  nition
The factors of production 
refer to the resources required to produce a good or service, namely land, labour, capital and enterprise.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne and provide examples of the factors of production
★ outline the rewards for the factors of production
★ explain the inﬂ  uences on the mobility of factors of production
★ understand the causes of changes in the quantity and quality of factors of 
production.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   6 24/01/18   9:54 AMFactors of production
7» Enterprise — the risk-taking and business skills necessary to organise the 
production process successfully, and to motivate workers so they work to the 
best of their ability, in the pursuit of profi  t.
» Labour — people to work on the production line, perform administrative tasks, 
promote the drinks effectively to customers and manage the company.
» Land — the natural resources required to make Coca-Cola, such as sugar, water 
and caffeine. 
Activity
Consider the resources (factors of production) required to deliver an IGCSE Economics 
lesson. Discuss whether it is possible to know which of the four factors of production is the most important for economic activity.
▲ What resources are used to deliver a lesson?
Activity
Consider the resources (factors of production) required to deliver an IGCSE Economics 
lesson. Discuss whether it is possible to know which of the four factors of production is 
Rewards for factors of production
As the factors of production are productive resources, each has a reward for its 
use in the production process:
» The reward for land is called rent. Rental income comes from the ownership of 
property, such as physical and related assets, and is paid by the tenants of the land resources.
» The reward for labour is called wages and salaries. Wages are paid to workers 
on an hourly basis, such as those who earn a national minimum wage (see Chapter 18). Salaried staff are paid a fi  xed amount per month.
» The reward for capital is called interest. If the interest rate (see Chapter 27) 
is high, it becomes less worthwhile for businesses and households to borrow money for production purposes because the cost of borrowing is high, and vice versa.
» The reward for enterprise is called proﬁ  t . This is the return for the 
entrepreneur’s good business ideas and for taking the risks in starting up and running the organisation. Profi  t is what remains after all business costs are paid, including payment to the other factors of production.
Collectively, the four rewards for the factors of production are known as income.Study tip
The ﬁ  rst letter of each 
of the four factors of production spells the word CELL. This is a useful way of remembering the four factors of production.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   7 24/01/18   9:54 AM2 THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
8The mobility of factors of production
The mobility of factors of production refers to the extent to which resources 
can be changed for one another in the production process. For example, farming can be very traditional in some parts of the world and rely heavily on labour resources. However, in other countries, farming is predominantly mechanised, with a heavy reliance of capital resources.
Economists usually talk about labour mobility, although factor mobility can 
apply to any factor of production. For example:
» Land might be used for various competing purposes, such as to grow certain 
fruits and/or vegetables, or to construct buildings such as housing, hospitals or schools.
» Capital equipment might be used for different purposes too. For example, the 
same machinery in the Coca-Cola factory can be used to produce Coca-Cola, Sprite and/or Fanta.
» Entrepreneurs can also be mobile. For example, Meg Whitman, chief executive 
offi  cer (CEO) of Hewlett-Packard, was previously a vice president of the Walt Disney Company and CEO of eBay.
Labour mobility can be broken down into two categories.
Geographical mobility
Geographical mobility refers to the willingness and ability of a person to relocate from one area to another for employment purposes. Some people may not be geographically mobile for the following reasons:
» Family ties and related commitments — people may not want to relocate as they want to be near their family and friends. There may be other commitments such as schooling arrangements for children (it can be highly disruptive to the education of children who have to move to a new school in a new town or country).
» Costs of living — the costs of living vary between regions and countries, so may be too high in another location, making it uneconomical for a person to relocate. For example, a bus driver may fi  nd it impossible to relocate from the countryside to the city because house prices are much higher in the city and he or she therefore cannot afford to purchase a home in the city. By contrast, a banker may be offered a relocation allowance to move to another country and the potential earnings are much higher, so the banker has greater geographical mobility than the bus driver.
Occupational mobility
Occupational mobility refers to the ease with which a person is able to change between jobs. The degree of occupational mobility depends on the cost and length of training required to change profession. Developing and training employees to improve their skills set improves labour occupational mobility (as workers can perform a greater range of jobs).
Generally, the more occupationally and geographically mobile workers are in a 
country, the greater its international competitiveness and economic growth are likely to be.
Deﬁ  nition
Geographical mobility 
refers to the extent to which labour is willing and able to move to different locations for employment purposes.
Deﬁ  nition
Occupational mobility refers to the extent to which labour is able to move between jobs. Retraining and upskilling help workers to improve occupational mobility.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   8 24/01/18   9:54 AMCauses of changes in the quantity and quality of factors of production
9Exam-style question
In some countries around the world there are shortages of people with particular 
skills. For example:
• There is a global shortage of doctors and nurses.
• Belgium and the UK have a shortage of chefs.  • Nordic countries have a shortage of psychologists.
In 2013 there were 200 million international migrants, including nurses 
trained in the Philippines, who were prepared to relocate to take advantage of employment opportunities.
a Give two reasons why there is a global shortage of doctors and nurses. [4]
b Analyse the reasons why nurses trained in the Philippines may relocate to 
take advantage of employment opportunities. [6]
c Analyse how countries can attract individuals to professions in which they 
have a shortage of workers. [6]
Activity
Use the BBC Interactive Guide (http://goo.gl/YJjCK) to investigate global employment 
opportunities in selected countries around the world.
Activity
Use the BBC Interactive Guide (
opportunities in selected countries around the world.
Causes of changes in the quantity and 
quality of factors of production
The quantity and quality of factors of production will change if there is a change 
in the demand for and/or supply of land, labour, capital or enterprise. Possible changes include the following:
» Changes in the costs of factors of production — for example, higher labour 
costs caused by an increase in the national minimum wage would tend to reduce the demand for labour.
» Government policies can affect the costs of production, such as through the 
use of taxes and subsidies (see Chapter 15). For example, lower income taxes can help to create incentives to work, thus increasing the quantity of labour resources. Complying with regulations will also tend to increase costs of production. By contrast, subsidies help to reduce production costs, thereby increasing output of goods and services.
» New technologies allow fi  rms to produce more output. Higher productivity also 
enables fi  rms to cut their average costs of production.
» Net migration of labour (see Chapter 34) will affect the quantity of labour 
in the economy. If more people migrate to a country than emigrate to other countries, the quantity of labour will increase, ceteris paribus (Latin for ‘all other things remaining equal’). 
» Improvements in education and healthcare will improve the quality of labour as 
workers become more valuable to fi  rms. This helps to boost production. 
» Unfavourable weather conditions (such as severe droughts or ﬂ  ooding) will 
reduce the supply of agricultural products. Conversely, good weather conditions will increase supply, thus increasing agricultural output.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   9 24/01/18   9:54 AM2 THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
10
Activity
In class, discuss why all four factors of production are required in a) the construction of 
roads and b) haircuts.
Activity
In class, discuss why all four factors of production are required in a) the construction of 
roads and b) haircuts.
Exam-style questions
1 Which option is not an example of capital as a resource?  [1]
A Computers
B FactoryC MachineryD Natural resources
2 Which event is most likely to cause an increase in the average wage 
of labour?  [1]
A A decrease in the national minimum wageB An increase in the national minimum wageC Government tax policiesD Net migration of labour into the country
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by the term ‘factors of production’?
2 What are the four factors of production?3 What are the various rewards for the factors of production?4 What is the collective name for the four returns on the factors of production?5 What is meant by the mobility of factors of production?6 How does geographical mobility of factor resources differ from occupational 
mobility?
7 What are the various causes of changes in the quantity and quality of factors 
of production?
Revision checklist
✔ Factors of production refer to the resources required to produce a good 
or service, namely land, labour, capital and enterprise.
✔ The return on the four factors of production are rent (land), wages and 
salaries (labour), interest (capital) and proﬁ  t (enterprise). Collectively, 
the rewards are called income.
✔ Geographical mobility refers to the extent to which a person is willing 
and able to move to different locations for employment purposes.
✔ Occupational mobility refers to the extent to which a person is able to 
switch between different jobs (occupations).
✔ The quantity and quality of factors of production will change if there 
is a change in the demand for and/or supply of land, labour, capital or enterprise.
 Factors of production refer to the resources required to produce a good 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   10 24/01/18   9:54 AM11
 3  Opportunity cost
Opportunity cost
Opportunity cost is a very important concept in the study of economics. 
Opportunity cost is the cost of the next best opportunity forgone (given up) when making economic decisions. Every choice made has an opportunity cost because in most cases there is an alternative.
Some examples of opportunity cost are as follows:
» The opportunity cost of choosing to study IGCSE Economics is another IGCSE 
subject you could be studying instead.
» The opportunity cost of visiting the cinema on Saturday night could be the 
money you would have earned from babysitting for your neighbour instead of going to the cinema.
» The opportunity cost of building an additional airport terminal is using the 
same government funds to build public housing for low-income families.
» The opportunity cost of a school purchasing 100 laptops for use in classrooms 
might be the science equipment that could not be bought as a result.
» The opportunity cost of going to university to study for a degree is the loss in 
income that would have been earned if the undergraduate student had chosen to work instead.
Case study: US federal government spending
According to the Federal Ministry of Finance, the US federal government announced 
spending of almost $329 billion in its 2017 budget on the following:
• 42.2% on labour and social affairs
• 11.1% on national defence• 8.2% on transport and digital infrastructure• 6.1% on federal debts• 5.3% on education and research• 4.6% on healthcare
The government raises a ﬁ  nite amount of taxation revenue and must decide how much 
of the budget to allocate to each area of public spending. There is an opportunity cost attached to the decisions made as increased spending in one area may lead to decreased spending in another.
Activity
Investigate the major components of government spending in your country, or a country of your choice. Be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with others in the class.
Activity
Investigate the major components of government spending in your country, or a country 
of your choice. Be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with others in the class.
Deﬁ  nition
Opportunity cost is the cost 
of the next best opportunity forgone when making a decision.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne and provide examples of opportunity cost
★ understand the inﬂ  uence of opportunity cost on decision making.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   11 24/01/18   9:54 AM3 OPPORTUNITY COST
12The inﬂ  uence of opportunity cost on 
decision making
Opportunity cost directly inﬂ  uences the decisions made by consumers, workers, 
producers and governments. Referring to the basic economic problem (see Chapter 1), there are competing uses for the economy’s scarce resources. Thus, there is an opportunity cost when allocating scarce resources.
» Consumers have limited incomes, so whenever they purchase a particular good 
or service, they give up the benefi  ts of purchasing another product.
» Workers tend to specialise (see Chapter 18) — for example, as secondary 
school teachers, accountants, doctors and lawyers. By choosing to specialise in a particular profession, workers give up the opportunity to pursue other jobs and careers.
» Producers need to choose between competing business opportunities. For 
example, Toyota has to decide how best to allocate its research and development expenditure in terms of developing its petrol-fuelled cars or its hybrid electric cars.
» Governments constantly face decisions that involve opportunity cost. If 
a government chooses to spend more money on improving the economy’s infrastructure (such as improving its transportation and communications networks), it has less money available for other uses (such as funding education and healthcare).
In general, decision makers will choose the option that gives them the greatest economic return. For example, a government might prioritise welfare benefi  ts over its expenditure on national defence or repaying the national debt.
Activity
Discuss whether quantitative or qualitative factors play a bigger role in economic 
decision making.
To what extent does the concept of opportunity cost apply to your own decisions about 
post-16 and university education?
Activity
Discuss whether quantitative or qualitative factors play a bigger role in economic 
decision making.
Exam-style questions
1 The opportunity costs for a farmer in terms of corn and wheat production are 
shown in the following table.
Corn production (units) Wheat production (units)
65 plus 30
55 plus 35
 Calculate the opportunity cost for the farmer of producing 1 unit of wheat. [2]
2 Juke bought a new Xbox One games console for $295 but has never used it. 
The second-hand value of his Xbox One is $195. What is the opportunity cost of Juke owning the games console? [1]
A $0B $100C $195D $295
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   12 24/01/18   9:54 AMThe influence of opportunity cost on decision making
133 What is the opportunity cost to the economy if the government decides 
to build a new motorway (highway)? [1]
A The cost of relocating and compensating residents in order to build the 
motorway 
B The money spent on building the motorway
C The other projects that could have been undertaken had the motorway 
not been built
D The overall cost to taxpayers of fi  nancing the motorway project
Activity
Discuss the costs and beneﬁ  ts of the government building a new airport. What are the 
key opportunity costs of such a decision?
Activity
Discuss the costs and beneﬁ  ts of the government building a new airport. What are the 
key opportunity costs of such a decision?
Chapter review questions
1 How is the term ‘opportunity cost’ deﬁ  ned?2 What might be the opportunity cost of a student studying IGCSE Economics?3 Why do consumers face opportunity costs in decision making?4 Why do workers face opportunity costs in decision making?5 Using an example, explain why producers (ﬁ  rms) face opportunity costs in decision 
making.
6 Using an example, explain why governments face opportunity costs in decision 
making.
Revision checklist
✔ Opportunity cost is a very important concept in the study of economics 
as it affects the decision making of consumers, workers, producers and 
governments.
✔ Opportunity cost is the cost of the next best opportunity forgone when 
making a decision.
✔ Opportunity cost arises because economic agents have to make 
competing choices due to ﬁ  nite resources. Thus, there is an opportunity cost when allocating scarce resources.
 Opportunity cost is a very important concept in the study of economics 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   13 24/01/18   9:54 AM14
 4  Production possibility curve 
Production possibility curve diagrams
The production possibility curve (PPC) shows the maximum combination of any 
two categories of goods and services that can be produced in an economy, at any point in time. Essentially, it shows the productive capacity of the economy.
Assume a country can only produce two types of goods: wooden furniture and 
olive oil. It has a limited amount of land, labour and capital. In Figure 4.1, if producers wish to increase production of olive oil from O
1 to O 2 then the amount 
of wooden furniture manufactured will have to decrease from W 1 to W 2. The 
opportunity cost of producing the extra O 1 to O 2 litres of olive oil is therefore W 1 
to W 2 tonnes of wooden furniture.
C
DPPC
BE
FWooden furniture
(tonnes)
Olive oil (litres)The increased amount of
olive oil is produced at
the expense (opportunity
cost) of wooden furniture W2
O1OO2W1A
▲ Figure 4.1 The production possibility curve (PPC) diagram
Students need to be aware of the signifi  cance of the location of production 
points, and be able to explain points under, on and beyond a PPC. The production points in Figure 4.1 are as follows:
» Point A — all resources are dedicated to the production of wooden furniture.
» Point B — all resources are dedicated to the production of olive oil.
» Point C — W 1 tonnes of wooden furniture are produced along with O 1 litres of 
olive oil.
» Point D — W 2 tonnes of wooden furniture and O 2 litres of olive oil are produced. 
» Point E — this point is beyond the production possibility curve and lies outside 
the productive capacity of the economy, so it is currently unattainable.
» Point F — this point is within the productive capacity of the economy, so the 
production of both olive oil and wooden furniture can increase without any opportunity cost as some factors of production are currently not being used.
Deﬁ  nition
The production possibility 
curve (PPC) represents the maximum combination of goods and services which can be produced in an economy, i.e. the productive capacity of the economy.
Deﬁ  nition
The PPC diagram is a graphical representation of the maximum combination of the amounts of goods and services that can be produced in an economy, per period of time.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne a production possibility curve (PPC)
★ draw and interpret appropriate PPC diagrams
★ explain the signiﬁ  cance of the location of production points on PPC diagrams
★ explain the causes and consequences of shifts and movements of the PPC.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   14 24/01/18   9:54 AM15Causes and consequences of shifts and movements of the PPC
Exam-style questions
Study the diagram below, which shows the production possibility curve diagram 
for Country Y. It produces only two products: wheat and barley.
C
DPPC
BE
FWheat (tonnes)
Barley (tonnes)W2
B1OB2W1A
1 If Country Y wishes to increase the production of wheat from W 2 to W 1,  
what is the opportunity cost?  [1]
A An increase in barley production from B 1 to B 2
B An outward shift of the PPC towards point E
C A reduction in barley production from B 2 to B 1
D C to D
2 At which point is there spare capacity in the economy?  [1]
A Point C
B Point D
C Point E
D Point F
Causes and consequences of shifts and 
movements of the PPC 
Movements along the curve
For a country to be on its PPC two conditions have to be 
met:
» All resources are used — there is no unemployment of factors of production.
» There is efficiency in the use of resources — factors of production are allocated to their best use/purpose.
A movement along a PPC results in an opportunity cost. This means that to produce more of one product, there must be less of another product. In Figure 4.2, a movement along the PPC from point X to point Y means more consumer goods are produced (from A to B), but at the expense of fewer producer goods (from C to D).YProducer goods
Consumer goodsD
AOBPPC
X
C
▲ Figure 4.2 Movements along the PPC
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   15 24/01/18   9:54 AM4 PRODUCTION POSSIBILITY CURVE 
16Shifts of the curve
For a country to shift its PPC outwards, as shown in Figure 4.3, there must be 
economic growth (see Chapter 29). This can come about in the following ways:
» An increase in the quality of factors of production (see Chapter 2), such as 
more highly skilled labour achieved through investments in education, research and training. Increased productivity can also be caused by technological advances and improved production techniques.
» An increase in the quantity of factors of production, such as the discovery of 
new resources, the reclamation of land, or net migration of labour into a country.
OPPC1PPC2Goods
Services
▲ Figure 4.3 An outward shift of the PPCOPPC2PPC1Goods
Services
▲ Figure 4.4 An inward shift of the PPC
In Figure 4.3, economic growth causes an outward shift of the PPC from PPC 1 
to PPC 2. This means the economy can produce more goods and services, without 
necessarily incurring an opportunity cost.
Economies strive to increase their productive capacity. For example, advances 
in technology will result in higher productivity and output for an economy. This means that even with the same amount of factors of production, more can be produced, resulting in an outward shift of the PPC.
By contrast, detrimental changes can cause the PPC to shift inwards. These 
changes might include a powerful storm, a natural disaster or a war that destroys a large proportion of the economy’s farmland, factories and infrastructure. In Figure 4.4, the PPC shifts inwards from PPC
1 to PPC 2 and represents a decrease in 
the productive capacity of the economy.
Activity
Low-lying areas of Bangladesh are prone to ﬂ  ooding each year. Crops are lost and 
thousands of people lose their homes. During times of severe ﬂ  ooding, roads and railways are damaged and farmers ﬁ  nd it impossible to get their dwindled crops to market.
1 Draw a relevant PPC diagram and explain the impact of ﬂ  ooding on the productive 
capacity of Bangladesh.
2 On the diagram, draw and label a point where some of the factors of production will 
be idle.
3 On the diagram, draw and label a point that is unattainable.
Activity
Low-lying areas of Bangladesh are prone to ﬂ  ooding each year. Crops are lost and 
thousands of people lose their homes. During times of severe ﬂ  ooding, roads and 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   16 24/01/18   9:54 AMShifts of the curve
17Exam-style question
Which of the following is most likely to cause an inwards shift of a country’s 
production possibility curve? [1]
A A natural disaster in the economyB An increase in the quantity of factors of productionC Better quality factors of productionD Higher opportunity costs of production
Activity
Discuss why an outwards shift of the PPC is not always good for the economy.
Activity
Discuss why an outwards shift of the PPC is not always good for the economy.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by productive capacity?
2 What does a production possibility curve diagram show?3 How is the concept of opportunity cost shown on a PPC diagram?4 Which two conditions must hold for an economy to be operating on its PPC?5 What are the causes of a shift of the PPC?
Revision checklist
✔ The production possibility curve (PPC) shows the maximum combination 
of any two categories of goods and services that can be produced in an 
economy.
✔ The PPC diagram is a graphical representation of the maximum 
combinations of amounts of goods and services that can be produced in an economy.
✔ For a country to be on its PPC two conditions have to be met: full use of 
all factors of production and efﬁ  cient use of all resources.
✔ Movements along a PPC incur an opportunity cost.
✔ Economies strive to increase their productivity capacity, as shown by an 
outward shift of the PPC.
✔ Detrimental changes, such as natural disasters or war, can cause the 
PPC to shift inwards.
) shows the maximum combination 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-01.indd   17 24/01/18   9:54 AMThis page intentionally left blank19
SECTION 2
The allocation 
of resources
Chapters
 5 Microeconomics and macroeconomics
 6 The role of markets in allocating resources 7 Demand 8 Supply 9 Price determination10 Price changes11 Price elasticity of demand12 Price elasticity of supply13 Market economic system14 Market failure15 Mixed economic system
This is the largest section of the syllabus, and examines 
the fundamental principles of resource allocation through the price mechanism in a market economy. Economics tries to address three key questions about resource allocation: what, how and for whom to produce. At the heart of resource allocation are the market forces of demand and supply, which determine market equilibrium and disequilibrium. You will need to be able to draw and interpret demand and supply schedules and curves, used to identify (dis)equilibrium prices, shortages and surpluses in different markets. The important concepts of price elasticity of demand and price elasticity of supply are examined in a real-world context. Finally, the topic of market failure is studied, in relation to the existence of external costs and beneﬁ  ts. Government intervention to correct market failures is needed to ensure a more efﬁ  cient allocation of resources.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   19 24/01/18   11:20 AM20
 5  Microeconomics and 
macroeconomics
Microeconomics
Microeconomics is the study of particular markets and sections of the economy 
(rather than the economy as a whole). It is concerned with the economic factors that affect choices and the effects of changes in these factors on decision makers. Microeconomics studies the economic behaviour of individuals, households and fi  rms in relation to these factors.
Topics covered in microeconomics include:
» factors of production (Chapter 2)
» demand (Chapter 7)
» supply (Chapter 8)
» price elasticity of demand (Chapter 11)
» market failure (Chapter 14)
» economies and diseconomies of scale (Chapter 20)
» fi  rms’ costs, revenues and objectives (Chapter 22)
» market structure (Chapter 23).
Microeconomics attempts to explain what is likely to happen if certain economic factors change. For example, if the demand for a fashionable product increases, this will tend to raise its prices. If there is a major discovery of gold, its price will tend to fall because gold supply is increased. Microeconomics tends to use theory, rather than empirical evidence, to explain changes in individual markets and industries.
▲ Gold bars
Deﬁ  nition
Microeconomics is the 
study of particular markets and sections of the economy, rather than the economy as a whole.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ distinguish between microeconomics and macroeconomics
★ explain the decision makers involved in microeconomics and 
macroeconomics.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   20 24/01/18   11:20 AMMacroeconomics
21Macroeconomics
Macroeconomics is the study of economic behaviour and decision making in the 
whole economy, rather than individual segments of the economy. It looks at aggregate variables, such as the demand for all goods and services in the economy (national output) and the general level of prices in the economy (infl  ation and defl  ation).
Topics covered in macroeconomics include:
» the role of government (Chapter 24)
» redistribution of income (Chapter 25)
» fi  scal policy (Chapter 26)
» monetary policy (Chapter 27)
» supply-side policies (Chapter 28)
» economic growth (Chapter 29)
» employment and unemployment (Chapter 30)
» infl  ation and defl  ation (Chapter 31).
Macroeconomics attempts to explain what is likely to happen to the economy as a whole if certain economic factors change. For example, a prolonged recession (see Chapter 29) will cause unemployment in many industries, and result in negative economic growth for the economy as a whole. Macroeconomics places greater emphasis on using empirical data as evidence to explain changes in the economy, such as booms and recessions (see Chapter 29).
▲ Unemployment is a fundamental macroeconomic topic
Decision makers in microeconomics
Microeconomics is concerned with decision making by individuals, households and fi  rms, such as:
» an entrepreneur considering which type of business to start
» a farmer deciding how best to allocate farmland to different crops or the 
rearing of farm animals
» fi  rms investigating the prices being charged by their rivals in order to set their 
own prices
Deﬁ  nition
Macroeconomics is 
the study of economic behaviour and decision making in the whole economy, rather than individual markets.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   21 24/01/18   11:20 AM5	 Microecono Mics	and	Macroecono Mics
22» firms considering the economic profits of difference choices before making a 
decision
» firms deciding on the best combination of factors of production to use in the production process
» how internal and external economies of scale can affect a firm’s scale of operations
» consideration of the different reasons for firms to adopt labour-intensive or capital-intensive production methods (see Chapter 21)
» the advantages and disadvantages of small firms (see Chapter 20) versus the advantages and disadvantages of different types of merger (horizontal, vertical and conglomerate)
» a household considering the economic costs of raising a child
» workers deciding how to allocate their time and energy based on consideration of opportunity costs
» the influence of wage differentials on labour markets (see Chapter 18)
» third parties losing out from the misallocation of resources through the over-consumption of demerit goods (see Chapter 14) and the under-consumption of merit goods
» consideration of the advantages and disadvantages of trade unions from the viewpoint of workers, firms and the government (see Chapter 19).
Decision makers in macroeconomics
Macroeconomics is concerned with decision making for the economy as a whole. Examples include:
» government decisions regarding which products to tax, such as tobacco, alcohol and petrol — this has a macroeconomic impact not only on these industries but also on the wider economy (see Chapter 14)
» government policies to achieve economic growth, stable inflation, employment, balance of payments stability and redistribution of income (see Chapter 25)
» government decisions to improve market efficiencies and the productive capacity of the economy, such as through education and training, labour market reforms, deregulation, improving incentives to work and invest, and privatisation (see Chapter 28) 
» the government setting different rates of progressive taxation (see Chapter 26) to ensure those who earn more pay a greater proportion of income tax, without creating disincentives to work
» government decisions and policies regarding the eradication of poverty (see Chapter 33)
» government decisions about immigration and emigration (see Chapter 34)
» government decisions about protectionism, such as the use of tariffs and import quotas to limit competition from international rivals (see Chapter 37) 
» the decision of the population in how they allocate their income between savings and expenditure (household consumption)
» decision making of consumers, workers, savers, lenders and firms due to the consequences of inflation (see Chapter 31)
» the economy’s decision about the degree of international specialisation (see Chapter 36)
» the role of speculators and multinational companies in the determination of exchange rates (see Chapter 38).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   22 24/01/18   11:20 AMDecision makers in macroeconomics
23
Activity
Take a look at today’s newspaper (use an online version if you prefer). Find three news 
stories that are microeconomic topics and another three that are macroeconomic topics. Be prepared to share these with the rest of the class, and make sure you can explain your reasoning.
Activity
Take a look at today’s newspaper (use an online version if you prefer). Find three news 
stories that are microeconomic topics and another three that are macroeconomic 
Exam-style questions
1 Which topic is not studied in microeconomics?  [1]
A Economic growth
B Monopoly and competitionC Price elasticity of supplyD Production possibility curves
2 Which option is not studied in macroeconomics?  [1]
A The consequences of a higher interest rateB The effects of a lower exchange rateC The impacts of price changes in the market for smartphonesD The impacts of progressive taxation
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by microeconomics?
2 What is meant by macroeconomics?3 Who are the main decision makers in microeconomics and how does this differ from 
the decision makers in macroeconomics?
4 Who are the decision makers affected by microeconomics?5 Who are the decision makers affected by macroeconomics?
Revision checklist
✔ Microeconomics is the study of particular markets and sections of the 
economy, rather than the economy as a whole.
✔ Microeconomics tends to use theory, rather than empirical evidence, to 
explain changes in individual markets and industries.
✔ Microeconomics is concerned with decision making by individuals, 
households and ﬁ  rms.
✔ Macroeconomics is the study of economic behaviour and decision making 
of the whole economy, rather than individual markets.
✔ Macroeconomics places greater emphasis on using empirical data 
as evidence to explain changes in the economy, such as booms and 
recessions.
✔ Macroeconomics is concerned with decision making for the economy as a 
whole.
 Microeconomics is the study of particular markets and sections of the 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   23 24/01/18   11:20 AM24
 6  The role of markets in allocating 
resources
The market system
The market system refers to the method of allocating scarce resources through 
the market forces of demand and supply. Markets consist of buyers (who have demand for a particular good or service) and sellers (suppliers of a particular good or service). Also known as the price mechanism, the market system establishes market equilibrium where demand equals supply, as shown in Figure 6.1. At this position, the market is cleared of any shortages or surpluses.
Equilibrium quantity Equilibrium
price Supply
Demand
O
Quantit y Price ( $)
▲ Figure 6.1 Market equilibrium
The demand curve (see Chapter 7) shows that consumers will tend to buy more as the price falls. The supply curve (see Chapter 8) shows that fi  rms will tend to offer more for sale as the price rises. When the opposing market forces of demand and supply are in balance, an equilibrium price and quantity are established, where all products offered for sale at that price are bought by consumers.
Market disequilibrium occurs when the market price is either above or below 
the equilibrium price. If the price of a product is above the equilibrium price, the product is deemed to be too expensive for consumers, so the quantity supplied will exceed the quantity demanded. To sell off this excess supply, the price must be reduced.
By contrast, if the price of a product is below the equilibrium price, the product 
is deemed to be too cheap to attract suffi  cient supply, so the quantity demanded will exceed the quantity supplied. To create an incentive to supply more, the price must be raised. Hence, the market system will tend to get rid of market disequilibrium in the long run.
Deﬁ  nitions
The market system refers 
to the method of allocating scarce resources through the market forces of demand and supply.Market equilibrium exists when the demand for a product matches the supply, so there is no excess demand (shortage) or excess supply (surplus).Market disequilibrium exists if the price for a product is too high (resulting in excess supply, or a surplus) or too low (resulting in excess demand, or a shortage).By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne the market system
★ explain the key questions about resource allocation in a market system
★ explain how the price mechanism allocates resources.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   24 24/01/18   11:21 AMKey decisions about resource allocation
25
▲ Prices are reduced to get rid of excess supplies
Case study: Thai rice
In 2017, the export price of Thai rice rose from $365 a tonne to $425 a tonne in a matter 
of weeks, driven by a sharp surge in the global demand for rice, and lower rice supply. Thailand is the world’s second-largest exporter of rice with around 23 per cent of total rice exports (India accounts for about 29 per cent of the world’s total rice exports).
Activity
Discuss how the signiﬁ  cant increase in the price of rice is likely to affect the Thai economy. Which stakeholder group(s) win or lose from this?
Activity
Discuss how the signiﬁ  cant increase in the price of rice is likely to affect the Thai 
economy. Which stakeholder group(s) win or lose from this?
Key decisions about resource allocation
All economies face the basic economic problem of scarcity of resources. All 
economic systems (see also Chapters 13 and 15) must address three key economic questions about determining resource allocation:
1 What production should take place? This question is about deciding which 
goods and services should be provided in the economy. For example, is it better for the economy to have more roads and airports or to have more schools and hospitals? As resources are limited in supply, decision makers realise there is an opportunity cost (see Chapter 3) in answering this question.
2 How should production take place? This question is about the methods 
and processes used to produce the desired goods and services. For example, decision makers will have to decide which combination of factors of production (land, labour, capital and enterprise) should be used in the production process.
3 For whom should production take place? This question is about which 
economic agents receive goods and services. For example, should any goods and services be provided free to everyone in the economy, irrespective of their willingness and ability to pay for them? Or should goods and services only be produced for those who can pay?
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   25 24/01/18   11:21 AM6	 tHe	role	of	Markets	in	allocatinG	resources
26 In a market system, the decision about what, how and for whom production 
should take place is determined by the forces of demand and supply. See 
Chapter 13 for more details on this.
Exam-style question
Which option is not a key economic question that is addressed by the market economy? [1]
A For whom should production take place?B How should production take place?C Why should production take place?D What production should take place?
Exam-style question
With the use of a relevant example, explain how prices are determined in a market system. [4]
Introduction to the price mechanism
The price mechanism refers to the system of relying on the market forces of demand and supply to allocate resources. In this system, the private sector (see Chapter 13) decides on the fundamental questions of what, how and for whom production should take place. For example, wage rates are determined by the forces of demand for labour (by private sector fi  rms) and supply of labour (by workers who offer their labour services). 
Features of the price mechanism include the following:
» There is no government interference in economic activities. Resources are 
owned by private economic agents who have the economic freedom to allocate scarce resources without interference from the government.
» Goods and services are allocated on the basis of price — a high price encourages 
more supply whereas a low price encourages consumer spending. Goods and services are sold to those who have the willingness and ability to pay.
» The allocation of factor resources is based on fi  nancial incentives — for 
example, agricultural land is used for harvesting crops with the greatest fi  nancial return, while unprofi  table products are no longer produced.
» Competition creates choice and opportunities for fi  rms and private individuals. 
Consumers can thus benefi  t from a variety of innovative products, at competitive prices and of high quality.
Exam-style question
Which option is not a feature of the price mechanism?  [1]
A Competition creates choice and opportunities for fi  rms and private individuals.B Goods and services are allocated on the basis of price.C Resources are owned by private economic agents who have the economic 
freedom to allocate scarce resources.
D Rules and regulations are imposed to correct market failures, such as the 
overconsumption of demerit goods.Study tip
To better understand 
the concept of the price mechanism, refer to Chapters 7 and 8 on demand and supply.
Deﬁ  nition
The price mechanism refers to the system of relying on the market forces of demand and supply to allocate resources.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   26 24/01/18   11:21 AMIntroduction to the price mechanism
27Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by the market system?
2 What is meant by market equilibrium?3 How does market disequilibrium occur?4 What are the three key economic questions that all economies must address?5 What is the price mechanism?6 What are the key features of the price mechanism?
Revision checklist
✔ The market system refers to the method of allocating scarce resources 
through the market forces of demand (buyers) and supply (sellers).
✔ Market equilibrium is established where the demand for a product is 
equal to the supply of the product.
✔ Market disequilibrium occurs when the market price is either above 
(creating surpluses) or below (creating shortages) the equilibrium price.
✔ All economies must address three key economic questions about 
determining resource allocation: what, how and for whom should 
production take place?
✔ The price mechanism refers to the system of relying on the market 
forces of demand and supply to allocate resources.
✔ Features of the price mechanism include: no government interference 
in economic activity, the allocation of resources based on price and ﬁ  nancial incentives, and competition creating choice and opportunities for ﬁ  rms and private individuals.
 The market system refers to the method of allocating scarce resources 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   27 24/01/18   11:21 AM28
 7  Demand
Demand
Demand refers to both the willingness and the ability of customers to pay a given 
price to buy a good or service. This is sometimes referred to as effective demand to distinguish genuine demand from a desire to buy something.
The amount of a good or service demanded at each price level is called the 
quantity demanded. In general, the quantity demanded falls as price rises, while the quantity demanded rises at lower prices. Hence, there is an inverse relationship between the price of a good or service and the quantity demanded. This rule is known as the law of demand. There are two reasons for this relationship:
» As the price of a good or service falls, the customer’s real income rises — that 
is, with the same amount of income, the customer is able to buy more products at lower prices.
» As the price of a good or service falls, a higher number of customers are able to 
pay, so they are more likely to buy the product.
Activity
Choose an item that you can buy in your country.
1 What are the factors that affect the demand for this product?
2 Which factor is the most important? Why?
Produce your ﬁ  ndings in an A3 poster format for displaying in the classroom.
Activity
Choose an item that you can buy in your country.
Determinants of demand
Although price is regarded as the key determinant of the level of demand for a 
good or service, it is not the only factor that affects the quantity demanded. Other determinants of demand can be remembered by the acronym HIS AGE:
» Habits, fashions and tastes — changes in habits, fashions and tastes can 
affect the demand for all types of goods and services. When products become fashionable (such as smartphones) this leads to an increase in demand for them, whereas those that become unfashionable (such as last season’s clothes) have a reduced level of demand.
Deﬁ  nition
Demand refers to the 
willingness and the ability of customers to pay a given price to buy a good or service. The higher the price of a product, the lower its demand tends to be.
Study tip
Some of the non-price 
determinants of demand can be remembered by the acronym MISC: marketing, income, substitutes and complements.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne demand
★ draw and interpret appropriate demand diagrams
★ explain movements (contractions and expansions) along a demand curve
★ explain the link between individual and market demand
★ explain the causes of shifts in a demand curve.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   28 24/01/18   11:21 AMDemand
29
▲ Fashionable products experience an increase in demand
» Income — higher levels of income mean that customers are able and willing to 
buy more goods and services. For example, the average person in the USA will 
have a higher level of demand for goods and services than the average person in Vietnam or Turkey.
» Substitutes and complements — substitutes are goods or services that can 
be used instead of each other, such as Coca-Cola or Pepsi and tea or coffee. If the price of one product falls, then it is likely the demand for its substitute will also fall. Complements are products that are jointly demanded, such as tennis balls and tennis racquets or cinema movies and popcorn. If the price of one product increases, then the demand for its complement is likely to fall.
» Advertising — marketing messages are used to inform, remind and persuade 
customers to buy a fi  rm’s products. Companies such as McDonald’s, Apple and Samsung spend hundreds of millions of dollars each year on their advertising budgets in an attempt to increase the demand for their products.
» Government policies — rules and regulations such as the imposition of taxes 
on tobacco and alcohol will affect the demand for certain products. Sales taxes cause prices to increase, thereby reducing the level of demand. By contrast, government subsidies for educational establishments and energy-effi  cient car makers help to encourage more demand for education and environmentally friendly cars due to the relatively lower prices.
» Economy — the state of the economy (for example, whether it is in an 
economic boom or a recession) has a huge impact on the spending patterns of the population. The global fi  nancial crisis of 2008, for example, caused the demand for most goods and services around the world to decline as households and businesses lacked confi  dence in the economy. By 2013, the fi  nancial crisis had caused unemployment to exceed 26 per cent in both Greece and Spain — the highest unemployment fi  gures ever experienced in the European Union. This undoubtedly reduced the level of demand for goods and services in these countries.
There are other factors that can infl  uence the level of demand for a particular good or service. For example, the weather can affect the demand for ice cream, beach resort holidays, winter jackets and umbrellas. The size and the demographics of the population (such as age, gender, ethnicity and religious beliefs) can also have an effect on the level of demand for goods and services. For example, adults and children have different buying habits.
Deﬁ  nitions
Substitutes are goods or 
services that can be used instead of each other, e.g. tea or coffee. Complements are products that are jointly demanded, e.g. tennis balls and tennis racquets.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   29 24/01/18   11:21 AM7	 deMand
30Price and demand
Diagrammatically, the demand curve is shown as a downward-sloping curve to 
indicate the inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded (see Figure 7.1).
DemandPrice ($ )
Quantity  demanded As the price falls from
P1 to P2, the quantit y
demanded rises from
Q1 to Q2
OP1
P2
Q1 Q2
▲ Figure 7.1 The demand curve
Movements along a demand curve
A change in the price of a good or service causes a movement along the demand curve. A price rise will cause a contraction in demand for the product — that is, the quantity demanded falls. By contrast, a reduction in price will cause an extension in the quantity demanded, as shown in Figure 7.2.
ExtensionContraction
DemandPrice ($)
Quantity demanded P3
P1
P2
Q3 Q1 Q2OA fall in price from P1 to P2
causes demand to extend from
Q1 to Q2 whereas a price rise
from P1 to P3 causes quantity
demanded to contract from Q1 to Q3
▲ Figure 7.2 Movements along the demand curve
Individual demand and market demand
The market demand refers to the aggregation of all individual demand for a product. It is found by adding up all individual demand at each price level (see Figure 7.3). For instance, suppose that a cinema charges $10 for its movie tickets and the demand from male customers totals 500 per week while 400 females purchase tickets at that price per week. The market demand for cinema tickets at $10 per ticket is therefore 900 tickets per week.
Deﬁ  nitions
A contraction in demand 
means a fall in the quantity demanded for a product following an increase in its price.An extension in demand means an increase in the quantity demanded for a product following a fall in its price.The market demand is the sum of all individual demand for a particular product.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   30 24/01/18   11:21 AMConditions of demand
31Dm Dw Dm + wP($)
Q$10
500 O
Male customers Female customers Total customersP($)
400 O Q QP($)
900 O
▲ Figure 7.3 The market demand curve
Conditions of demand
While a movement in demand is caused by price changes only, a change in all 
other (non-price) factors that affect demand, such as income, will cause a shift in demand. 
An increase in demand (rather than an increase in the quantity demanded) 
is represented by a rightward shift in the demand curve from D
1 to D 3 in  
Figure 7.4. For example, BMW recorded higher than expected profits in 2017 due to increasing demand for its cars in Europe, the USA and Asia. Hence, the demand for BMW’s cars was higher at all price levels. In Figure 7.4, when the demand curve shifts from D
1 to D 3 at a price of P 1 the quantity demanded increases from 
Q1 to Q 3.
By contrast, a decrease in demand (rather than a fall in the quantity 
demanded) is shown by shifting the demand curve to the left, from D 1 to D 2 in 
Figure 7.4, resulting in less quantity demanded at all price levels. At the price of P
1, demand falls from Q 1 to Q 2. For example, financial problems and rising 
unemployment in the economy will decrease the demand for cars.
Price ( $)
Quantity demanded A change in a non-price
factor that affects
demand will shift thedemand curve
OP1
Q2 Q1 Q3D3
D1
D2
▲ Figure 7.4 Shifts in the demand curveStudy tip
Remember the difference 
between changes in demand and changes in the quantity demanded. 
•
 A shift in demand is 
caused by changes in non-price factors that affect demand. 
•
 A movement along a demand curve is caused by changes in the price of the product.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   31 24/01/18   11:21 AM7	 deMand
32
▲ BMW saw record proﬁ  ts when increasing demand in China and other emerging markets 
boosted its car sales
Activity
France is the most visited tourist country in the world, with over 80 million visitors each 
year; the USA is second with 63 million visitors.
1 Investigate the most popular tourist cities in Europe.
2 Using demand theory, explain the factors that make these cities so popular.
Activity
France is the most visited tourist country in the world, with over 80 million visitors each 
year; the USA is second with 63 million visitors.
Activity
Using an appropriate demand diagram, explain the impact on the demand for Apple smartphones in the following cases.
1 An increase in the price of Apple smartphones.
2 An increase in the price of Samsung smartphones.3 An increase in consumer incomes.4 A successful advertising campaign promoting Samsung’s latest smartphones.
Activity
Using an appropriate demand diagram, explain the impact on the demand for Apple 
smartphones in the following cases.
Exam-style questions
1 What is the law of demand?  [1]
A The assumption that both price and non-price factors affect the level 
of demand for a good or service
B The infl  uence of non-price factors on the demand for a good or service
C The inverse relationship between the price of a good or service and the 
quantity demanded of that product
D The positive relationship between the price of a good or service and the 
quantity demanded of that product
2 What does a rightwards shift of the demand curve for a good or service show? [1]
A A higher level of demand at all given price levelsB A highly successful advertising campaign for the productC A lower price charged for the productD A reduction in the demand for the good or service
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   32 24/01/18   11:21 AMConditions of demand
33Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by demand?
2 What is the law of demand?3 What are the two reasons for the inverse relationship between price and quantity 
demanded?
4 What are the main determinants of demand?5 How does a movement along a demand curve differ from a shift in the demand 
curve?
6 How does a contraction in demand differ from an extension in demand?7 What is meant by market demand?8 How does a fall in quantity demanded differ from a fall in demand?
Revision checklist
✔ Demand refers to the willingness and the ability of customers to pay a 
given price to buy a good or service.
✔ The amount of a good or service demanded at each price level is called 
the quantity demanded.
✔ The law of demand states there is an inverse relationship between the 
price of a good or service and the quantity demanded.
✔ The determinants of demand can be remembered by ‘HIS AGE’: Habits, 
tastes and fashions; Income levels; Substitutes and complements (price 
and availability); Advertising; Government policies (such as taxes, regulations and subsidies); and the state of the Economy (for example, boom or recession).
✔ The demand curve is drawn as downward sloping from left to right, 
showing the inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded.
✔ A change in the price of a good or service causes a movement along the 
demand curve.
✔ A price rise causes a contraction in demand whereas a reduction in price 
causes an extension in demand for the product.
✔ The market demand refers to the sum of all individual demand for a 
product.
✔ A change in all other (non-price) factors that affect demand will cause a 
shift in demand.
 of customers to pay a 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   33 24/01/18   11:21 AM34
 8  Supply
Supply
Supply is the ability and willingness of fi  rms to provide goods and services at 
given price levels. Firms will have more incentives to supply their products at higher prices — the higher the price, the greater supply tends to be. There are two reasons for this positive relationship between price and supply:
» Existing fi  rms can earn higher profi  ts if they supply more.
» New fi  rms are able to join the market if the higher price allows them to cover 
their production costs.
Activity
Visit your nearest shopping mall.
1 Investigate the number of stores which cater speciﬁ  cally (or primarily) for women 
and compare this with the number of stores which cater only (or mainly) for men.
2 Using demand theory, explain why there is such a difference.
Activity
Visit your nearest shopping mall.
Activities
1 Investigate the factors that affect the supply of one of the following products:
a coffee
b chocolatec tead sugare oil
2 Organise your ﬁ  ndings as a PowerPoint document and be prepared to present it to 
the class.
Activities
1
 Investigate the factors that affect the supply of one of the following products:
 coffee
Determinants of supply
Although price is regarded as the key determinant of the level of supply of a good 
or service, it is not the only factor that affects the quantity supplied. Non-price factors that affect the level of supply of a product can be remembered by the acronym TWO TIPS:
» Time — the shorter the time period in question, the less time suppliers have to increase their output, so the lower the supply tends to be. For example, it is not possible for a farmer to increase the supply of agricultural products in a short time period, even if they are offered a higher price. Over time, output can be increased. 
Deﬁ  nition
Supply is the ability and 
willingness of ﬁ  rms to provide goods and services at given price levels.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne supply
★ draw and interpret appropriate supply diagrams
★ explain movements (contractions and extensions) along a supply curve
★ explain the link between individual and market supply
★ explain the causes of shifts in a supply curve.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   34 24/01/18   11:21 AMPrice and supply
35» Weather — the supply of certain goods and services can depend on the 
weather: for example, favourable weather conditions will shift the supply of agricultural output to the right. Some service providers, such as airline carriers, may also limit or close their operations during adverse weather conditions, thereby shifting the supply curve to the left.
» Opportunity cost — price acts as a signal to producers to allocate their resources to the provision of goods and services with a greater level of profi  ts. For example, if the market price of corn falls while the price of apples increases, then farmers are likely to reduce their supply of corn (due to the higher opportunity cost) and raise their supply of apples. 
» Taxes — taxes imposed on the supplier of a product add to the costs of production. Therefore, the imposition of taxes on a product reduces its supply, shifting the supply curve to the left.
» Innovations — technological advances such as automation and wireless internet technologies mean that there can be greater levels of output at every price level. Hence, innovations will tend to shift the supply curve to the right.
» Production costs — if the cost of raw materials and other factors of production falls, then the supply curve will shift to the right, ceteris paribus. Hence, there is an increase in supply at each price level. A rise in production costs will reduce supply at each price.
» Subsidies — subsidies are a type of fi  nancial assistance from the government to help encourage output by reducing the costs of production for fi  rms. Subsidies are usually given to reduce the costs of supplying goods and services that are benefi  cial to society as a whole, such as education, training and healthcare. 
Price and supply
The law of supply states that there is a positive relationship between price and the quantity supplied of a product. Hence, a supply curve is drawn as upward sloping from left to right. In Figure 8.1, as the price increases from P
1 to P 2, the 
quantity supplied rises from Q 1 to Q 2.
SupplyPrice ($)
Quantity supplied As the price increases
from P1 to P2, the
quantity supplied risesfrom 
Q1 to Q2P2
P1
Q1O Q2
▲ Figure 8.1 The supply curve
Movements along a supply curve
A movement along a supply curve occurs only if the price of the product 
changes. A change in price alone causes a change in the quantity supplied. There is an extension in supply if price increases. A contraction in supply occurs if the price of the product falls (see Figure 8.2). For example, higher prices for Study tip
Some of the non-price 
determinants of supply can be remembered by using the acronym WITS: weather, ICT (technology), taxes and subsidies.
Deﬁ  nitions
An extension in supply means an increase in the quantity supplied of a product following an increase in its price.A contraction in supply means a fall in the quantity supplied of a product following a fall in its price.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   35 24/01/18   11:21 AM8	 suPPly
36Apple’s iPhone in China led to an extension in supply as the company opened its 
40th Apple Store in China in 2017.
Quantity supplied Q2Q1Q3Price ($)P3
P1
P2
OExtension
ContractionSupply
A fall in price from P1 to P2
causes the quantity supplied to
contract from Q1 to Q2 whereas a
price rise from P1 to P3 causes
the quantity supplied to extendfrom 
Q1 to Q3
▲ Figure 8.2 Movements along the supply curve
Individual supply and market supply
The market supply curve is the aggregation of all supply at each price level, 
as shown in Figure 8.3. Suppose that at a price of $300,000 per unit Airbus is willing and able to supply 300 aircraft and its rival Boeing supplies 320 aircraft, per time period. At this price, the total market supply is 620 aircraft. Hence, the market supply is found by adding up all individual supply at each price level.
$300,000
Airbus Boeing Total supplySA SB SA + BP($)
O 300 QP($)
O 320 QP($)
O 620 Q
▲ Figure 8.3 The market supply curve
Conditions of supply
A change in any of the non-price factors that affect the supply of a good or service will cause a shift in the supply curve. In Figure 8.4, a rightward shift of the supply curve from S
1 to S 2 is described as an increase in supply (rather than 
an increase in the quantity supplied). By contrast, a leftward shift of the supply curve from S
1 to S 3, results in a decrease in supply (rather than a fall in the 
quantity supplied). For example, Japan’s tsunami in March 2011, the country’s worst natural disaster, reduced the supply of major manufacturers such as Sony, Panasonic, Toyota and Honda. 
Activity
Discuss as a class how supply theory can be used to explain the way natural disasters, such 
as the tsunami in Japan, affect the output of manufactured goods, such as Toyota cars.
Activity
Discuss as a class how supply theory can be used to explain the way natural disasters, such 
as the tsunami in Japan, affect the output of manufactured goods, such as Toyota cars.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   36 24/01/18   11:21 AMConditions of supply
37S3 S1 S2
OQuantity suppliedPrice ($)An increase in supply is
shown by a rightward shiftof the supply curve from
S1 to S2. Similarly, a fall in
supply is represented by aleftward shift of the supplycurve from 
S1 to S3
▲ Figure 8.4 Shifts in the supply curve
Activities
1 Using an appropriate supply diagram, explain the impact on the supply of educational 
computer games in the following cases.
a The government provides subsidies to producers of educational computer games.b There is an increase in the rate of commission paid to creators and distributors of 
educational computer games.
c The government introduces a 15 per cent sales tax on all computer games.d There are technological advances in the production of educational computer 
games.
2 Using an appropriate diagram, explain how the following changes affect the supply or 
the quantity supplied in each scenario:a The Chinese government raises the minimum wage for factory workers by 20 per 
cent.
b Drought causes vegetable prices to soar in France.c New technology boosts productivity at Tata Motors, India’s largest car maker.d The US government subsidises the output of hybrid cars.e South Korea’s Samsung launches new tablet computers to rival Apple’s iPad.
Activities
1
 Using an appropriate supply diagram, explain the impact on the supply of educational 
computer games in the following cases.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by supply?2 Why is the supply curve upward sloping?3 What are the main determinants of supply?4 What is the law of supply?5 How does a contraction in supply differ from an extension in supply?6 How does market supply differ from individual supply?7 What is the difference between a movement along a supply curve and a shift in a 
supply curve?
8 What are the causes of shifts in the supply curve?
Study tip
• A shift in supply is caused 
by changes in non-
price factors that affect supply, such as taxes and adverse weather. 
• A movement along a 
supply curve is caused only by changes in prices.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   37 24/01/18   11:21 AM8	 suPPly
38
Revision checklist
✔ Supply refers to the ability and willingness of ﬁ  rms to provide goods and 
services at given price levels.
✔ The determinants of supply can be remembered by the acronym TWO 
TIPS: Time, Weather, Opportunity cost of production options, Taxes, 
Innovations, Production costs, and Subsidies.
✔ The law of supply says there is a positive relationship between price and 
the quantity supplied of a product.
✔ A movement along a supply curve is caused by a change in price.
✔ A contraction in supply means a lower quantity supplied due to a fall in 
price.
✔ An extension in supply means a higher quantity supplied due to an 
increase in price.
✔ The market supply curve is the sum of all supply at each price level.
✔ A change in non-price factors affecting the supply of a good or service 
will cause a shift in the supply curve.
 Supply refers to the ability and willingness of ﬁ  rms to provide goods and 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   38 24/01/18   11:21 AM39
 9  Price determination
Market equilibrium
Market equilibrium refers to the position where the demand for a product is 
equal to the supply of the product. At this point, an equilibrium price (also known as the market clearing price) is established. At the equilibrium price, there is neither excess quantity demanded nor excess quantity supplied (see Figure 9.1), and thus the equilibrium quantity is determined.
Diagrammatic representation of market equilibrium
Equilibrium quantity tradedEquilibrium
price Supply
Demand
O
Quantity tradedPrice ($)
▲ Figure 9.1 Market equilibrium
Market disequilibrium
Market disequilibrium occurs when the quantity demanded for a product is either higher or lower than the quantity supplied. Disequilibrium is ineffi  cient as it means there are either shortages or surpluses.
Shortages
If the selling price of a product is set too low (that is, below the equilibrium price), then demand will exceed supply (see Figure 9.2). This excess demand creates a shortage in the market. At a price of P
1, demand is Q d, 
while supply is only Q s. Hence, 
demand exceeds supply at this price. The excess demand will tend to cause price to rise back towards the equilibrium price of P
e.
Deﬁ  nitions
Market equilibrium 
occurs when the quantity demanded of a product is equal to the quantity supplied of the product, i.e. there are no shortages or surpluses.Equilibrium price is the price at which the demand curve for a product intersects the supply curve for the product. The market is therefore cleared of any excess demand or supply.Market disequilibrium occurs when the quantity demanded of a product is unequal to the quantity supplied of the product, i.e. there are shortages or surpluses.Excess demand refers to a situation where the market price is below the equilibrium price, thus creating a shortage in the market.A shortage occurs when demand exceeds supply because the price is lower than the market equilibrium.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne market equilibrium
★ draw and interpret demand and supply schedules and curves to establish 
equilibrium
★ deﬁ  ne market disequilibrium
★ draw and interpret diagrams to show shortages (excess demand) and 
surpluses (excess supply).
Quantity tradedPrice ($)
Excess
demandA shortage occurswhen demand exceed
s
supply because theprice is lower than themarket equilibrium
OPe
P1
QsQeQdDS
▲ Figure 9.2 Excess demand (shortage)
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   39 24/01/18   11:21 AM9	 Price	deterMination
40Surpluses
If the price is set too high (above the market clearing price), then supply will 
exceed demand, as shown in Figure 9.3. This results in a surplus, known as excess supply. In order for fi  rms to get rid of their excess supply (shown by the distance between Q
s and Q d at each price level above the equilibrium price), they 
will need to reduce price (from P 1 to P e). This is a key reason why leftover stocks 
of Christmas cards are reduced in price after 25 December and why unsold summer clothes go on sale during the autumn.
Quantity tradedPrice ($)Excess
supplySurplus is created
when supply exceedsdemand because theprice is higher than th
e
market equilibrium    
OP1
Pe
QdQeQsDS
▲ Figure 9.3 Excess supply (surplus)
Activity
The table below shows the demand and supply schedule for a particular product.
P ($) Qd (000s) Qs (000s)
 0 80  0
10 60 20
20 40 40
30 20 60
40  0 80
a Identify the equilibrium price.
b Calculate and identify the value of excess demand or supply if the price is $10.c Calculate and identify the value of excess demand or supply if the price is $40.
Activity
The table below shows the demand and supply schedule for a particular product.
Exam-style questions
Study the demand and supply schedule below and answer the questions that follow.
Price
($)Quantity demanded(units per week)Quantity supplied(units per week)
15 9,000 2,000
20 8,000 4,000
25 7,000 6,000
30 6,000 8,000
35 5,000 10,000
a At a price of $25, what situation does the market show?
A Market equilibrium
B Excess supplyC Excess demandD Stockpiling [1]
Deﬁ  nitions
A surplus is created when 
supply exceeds demand because the price is higher than the market equilibrium price.Excess supply refers to a situation where the market price is above the equilibrium price, thus creating a surplus in the market.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   40 24/01/18   11:21 AMMarket disequilibrium
41b If the average price is $30 over a four-week period of trading, how much 
excess will suppliers accumulate?
A 2000 unitsB 8000 unitsC 24,000 unitsD 32,000 units [1]
Exam-style question
Mexico is the world’s biggest producer of avocados, supplying about 45% of the planet’s avocados. In 2017, avocado prices reached a record high due to reduced harvests from major producers in Mexico, Peru and California. Prices also surged due to global demand in places like the US, Europe and China. The industry has become very profi  table for Mexican farmers, with avocados being nicknamed Mexico’s green gold.
a Defi  ne the term supply. [2]
b Using a demand and supply diagram, explain why reduced harvests caused 
avocado prices to reach a record high in 2017. [4]
c Analyse the reasons why the global demand for avocados may have increased. [6]
Activity
Investigate the economic reasons behind the European Union’s Common Agricultural 
Policy for EU farmers. Why does this policy tend to encourage excess supply of agricultural output?
Activity
Investigate the economic reasons behind the European Union’s Common Agricultural 
Policy for EU farmers. Why does this policy tend to encourage excess supply of 
Activity
Using demand and supply theory, discuss the reasons why property prices are extremely high in cities such as Hong Kong, London and Tokyo.
Activity
Using demand and supply theory, discuss the reasons why property prices are 
extremely high in cities such as Hong Kong, London and Tokyo.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by market equilibrium?2 What is meant by equilibrium price?3 What is meant by market disequilibrium?4 What is the difference between excess demand and excess supply?5 When do surpluses occur?6 When do shortages occur?
Revision checklist
✔ Market equilibrium refers to the position where the demand for a 
product is equal to the supply of the product.
✔ At the equilibrium price, there is neither excess quantity demanded nor 
excess quantity supplied.
✔ Market disequilibrium occurs when the quantity demanded for a product 
is either higher or lower than the quantity supplied.
✔ Excess demand refers to a situation where the market price is below the 
equilibrium price. This results in shortages.
✔ Excess supply refers to a situation where the market price is above the 
equilibrium price. This results in surpluses.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   41 24/01/18   11:21 AM42
 10  Price changes
Causes and consequences of price changes
Changes in non-price factors that affect demand or supply will cause a change in 
the equilibrium price and quantity traded. For example, in Figure 10.1, a sales tax imposed on tobacco products will shift the supply curve of cigarettes to the left. This raises the market equilibrium price from P
1 to P 2 and reduces the equilibrium 
quantity traded from Q 1 to Q 2.
OPrice ($)
Quantity tradedP2S2 S1
P1
Q2Q1DTax per unit
▲ Figure 10.1 Impact of an imposition of a sales tax
Figure 10.1 could represent any factor that shifts the supply curve to the left (see Chapter 8). For example, adverse weather conditions could reduce the level of agricultural output and subsequently force up the equilibrium price. 
By contrast, any factor that shifts supply to the right can be represented by 
Figure 10.2. For example, a subsidy for farmers or favourable weather conditions will shift the supply of agricultural output to the right. This reduces the equilibrium price of agricultural output from P
1 to P 2 but increases the quantity 
traded from Q 1 to Q 2.
OPrice ($)
Quantity traded P1S1 S2
P2
Q1Q2D
▲ Figure 10.2 Impact of favourable weather on agricultural outputBy the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ explain the causes of price changes
★ discuss the consequences of price changes.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   42 24/01/18   11:21 AMCauses and consequences of price changes
43Price changes can also occur due to shifts in demand (see Chapter 7). For 
example, any factor that shifts the demand curve to the right — such as higher levels of disposable income or effective persuasive advertising — will lead to higher prices as well as higher levels of quantity demanded. In Figure 10.3, higher household incomes lead to an increase in the demand for new cars, thus shifting the demand curve from D
1 to D 2. This results in a higher equilibrium price of P 2 
and a higher equilibrium quantity of Q 2. 
Quantity of new carsQ1Q2Price of new
cars ($)P2
D1D2S
P1
O
▲ Figure 10.3 Impact of higher household income on the market for new cars
By contrast, a fall in demand — perhaps due to negative publicity, lower prices of substitute products or lower household income due to a recession (see Chapter 29) — will cause the demand curve to shift to the left. This will result in a fall in price and a fall in the quantity traded. In Figure 10.4, mass unemployment in the economy leads to a fall in the demand for helium balloons. This causes the equilibrium quantity traded to fall to Q
2 and the 
equilibrium price to fall to P 2.
Quantity of helium balloonsQ1Q2Price of helium
balloons ($)P1
D2D1S
P2
O
▲ Figure 10.4 Impact of mass unemployment on the market for helium balloons
Activity
Investigate the various ways that different governments use to reduce the demand for 
cigarettes. You could compare and contrast the different levels of sales taxes used in countries such as Japan, China, the UK and Australia.
Activity
Investigate the various ways that different governments use to reduce the demand for 
cigarettes. You could compare and contrast the different levels of sales taxes used in 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   43 24/01/18   11:21 AM10	 Price	cHanGes
44
Activity
Using an appropriate demand and supply diagram, explain the impact on the market 
price and quantity traded in each of the following cases.
a The market for air travel following the imposition of higher fuel taxes.
b The market for Pepsi Cola following a fall in price of Coca-Cola.c The market for Japanese sushi following a successful marketing campaign 
promoting the health beneﬁ  ts of eating rice and ﬁ  sh.
d The market for Samsung smartphones following new technologies that improve 
productivity in its factories.
Activity
Using an appropriate demand and supply diagram, explain the impact on the market 
price and quantity traded in each of the following cases.
Exam-style questions
In 2012, Danish toy maker LEGO launched LEGO Friends to appeal primarily to 
girls. The products included mini-doll fi  gures, pink and purple coloured scheme toy sets, and pets. Founded in 1949, LEGO’s popular toy construction bricks had traditionally been targeted mainly at boys with theme sets such as Lego Racers, Lego Star Wars, Lego Batman and Lego Ninjago. In early 2013, the San Francisco Chronicle reported that LEGO had sold twice as many of the LEGO Friends toys 
as had been expected. The company said that demand from children and their families was overwhelmingly positive. BusinessWeek reported that LEGO had spent 
$40 million in its global marketing of LEGO Friends. According to LEGO, boys accounted for 90 per cent of its customers before the launch of LEGO Friends.
a Defi  ne the term ‘demand’. [2]
b Explain two possible reasons for the higher-than-expected demand for 
LEGO Friends toy construction bricks. [4]
Exam-style questions
1 Which statement explains why there might be a decrease in the demand 
for petrol (oil)? [1]
A An increasing number of drivers buy electric-powered cars
B Demand for new cars has increasedC New technologies reduce the time needed to extract oilD There is an increase in world oil supplies
2 The diagram below shows a change in the market for agricultural output. 
What is likely to have caused the change in supply? [1]
QuantityPrice ($)
DS1S2
O
A An increase in income tax ratesB Favourable weather conditionsC Higher cost of fertilisersD Subsidies provided to farmers
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   44 24/01/18   11:21 AMCauses and consequences of price changes
453 The diagram below shows a change in the market for smartphones. What 
is likely to have caused the change in demand? [1]
QuantityPrice ($)
OD2
D1S
A A fall in the price of laptops
B A lower sales tax on goodsC A reduction in income tax ratesD A signifi  cant fall in the price of smartphones
Chapter review questions
1 Which factors cause a change in the equilibrium price and quantity traded?
2 What is the consequence of sales taxes on equilibrium price and quantity?3 What is the impact of favourable weather conditions on the equilibrium price and 
quantity of agricultural output?
4 State three factors that can shift the demand curve.5 State three factors that can shift the supply curve.
Revision checklist
✔ Changes in non-price factors that affect demand or supply will cause a 
change in the equilibrium price and quantity.
✔ Price changes can occur due to shifts in supply, such as changes in costs 
of production.
✔ Lower supply causes equilibrium quantity to fall and equilibrium price 
to rise. An increase in supply causes equilibrium quantity to rise, thus 
causing equilibrium price to fall. 
✔ Price changes can also occur due to shifts in demand, such as changes 
in incomes.
✔ Lower demand causes equilibrium quantity to fall and the price to fall. 
By contrast, higher demand causes both equilibrium price and quantity to rise.
 Changes in non-price factors that affect demand or supply will cause a 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   45 24/01/18   11:21 AM46
 11  Price elasticity of demand
Price elasticity of demand
The law of demand (see Chapter 7) states that as the price of a product increases, 
the quantity demanded will tend to fall. However, the responsiveness of change in the quantity demanded may vary depending on the customer’s degree of ability and willingness to pay. For example, a rise in the price of a product with plenty of substitutes (such as bananas, greetings cards or chocolate bars) will have a larger impact on its level of demand than a price rise of a product that has fewer substitutes (such as petrol, toothpaste or haircuts).
Price elasticity of demand (PED) measures the degree of responsiveness of 
the quantity demanded of a product following a change in its price. If a price change causes a relatively small change in the quantity demanded, then demand is said to be price inelastic — that is, buyers are not highly responsive to changes in price. For example, if the price of rice increases slightly, it is unlikely to have a large effect on the demand for rice in countries like China, Vietnam and Thailand.
By contrast, demand is said to be price elastic if there is a relatively large 
change in the quantity demanded of a product following a change in its price — that is, buyers are very responsive to changes in price. For example, a small rise in the price of Pepsi Cola is likely to reduce its demand quite drastically as customers switch to buying rival brands such as Coca-Cola.
▲ Demand for soft drinks is price elastic because there are many substitute products
Deﬁ  nitions
Price elasticity of demand 
(PED) measures the extent to which demand for a product changes due to a change in its price.Price inelastic demand describes demand for a product that is unresponsive to changes in price, mainly because of the lack of substitutes for the product.Price elastic demand describes demand for a product that is responsive to changes in price, usually due to substitutes being available.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne and calculate price elasticity of demand (PED)
★ draw and interpret demand curve diagrams to show different PED
★ understand the determinants of PED
★ explain the relationship between PED and total revenue
★ demonstrate the signiﬁ  cance of PED for decision makers.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   46 24/01/18   11:21 AMCalculation of price elasticity of demand
47
▲ As a staple food for billions of people, rice is highly price inelastic in Asia and the West Indies
Activity
Explain whether the price elasticity of demand (PED) for the following products is likely 
to be elastic or inelastic. Justify your answers.
a Pineapples
b Tobaccoc Overseas holidaysd Textbooks
Activity
Explain whether the price elasticity of demand (PED) for the following products is likely 
to be elastic or inelastic. Justify your answers.
Calculation of price elasticity of demand
Price elasticity of demand is calculated using the formula:
Percentage change in quantity demanded
Percentage change in price
or annotated as:
%ΔQ D
%ΔP
For example, if a cinema increases its average ticket price from $10 to $11 and 
this leads to demand falling from 3500 to 3325 customers per week, then the PED for cinema tickets is calculated as:
» Percentage change in quantity demanded = [(3325 − 3500)/3500] × 
100 = −5%
» Percentage change in price = [(11 – 10/10)] × 100 = +10%
» PED = −5/10 = −0.5
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   47 24/01/18   11:21 AM11	 Price	elasticity	of	deMand
48Worked example
Calculating PED
Assume the demand for football match tickets at $50 is 50,000 per week. If the football club 
raises its price to $60 per ticket and demand subsequently falls to 45,000 per week, what is the value of price elasticity of demand?
➜ First, calculate the percentage change in the quantity demanded: demand falls by 10% from 
50,000 to 45,000 match tickets per week.
➜ Next, calculate the percentage change in the price of match tickets: prices rise by 20% from 
$50 to $60 per match ticket.
➜ Then, substitute these ﬁ  gures into the PED formula: 10/20 = (−)0.5
As the PED for match tickets is less than 1 (ignoring the minus sign), the demand for match 
tickets is price inelastic, i.e. football fans are not very responsive to the increase in match ticket prices. Subsequently, there is a smaller fall in the quantity demanded compared to the price rise.
Interpreting demand curve diagrams and price 
elasticity of demand
So what does a PED value of −0.5 actually mean? The above example suggests 
that the demand for cinema tickets is price inelastic — that is, relatively unresponsive to changes in price. This is because a 10 per cent increase in the price (from $10 to $11) only caused quantity demanded to drop by 5 per cent (from 3500 tickets per week to 3325).
The value of PED is negative due to the law of demand (see Chapter 7) — an 
increase in the price of a product will tend to reduce its quantity demanded. The inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded also applies in the case of a price reduction — a price fall tends to lead to an increase in the quantity demanded.
The calculation of PED generally has two possible outcomes:
» If the PED for a product is less than 1 (ignoring the minus sign), then demand 
price inelastic — that is, demand is relatively unresponsive to changes in 
Worked example
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   48 24/01/18   11:21 AMCalculation of price elasticity of demand
49price. This is because the percentage change in quantity demanded is smaller 
than the percentage change in the price (see Figure 11.1).
» If the PED for a product is greater than 1 (ignoring the minus sign), then 
demand is price elastic — that is, demand is relatively responsive to changes in price. This is because the percentage change in quantity demanded is larger than the percentage change in the price of the product (see Figure 11.2).
Quantity demandedDemandPrice ($)P2
P1
O Q2Q1As the price rises from P1 to
P2, the quantity demanded
falls by a smaller proportion
from Q1 to Q2. Examples of
products with low PED aresalt, alcohol, electricity,cigarettes and nail clippers
▲ Figure 11.1 A price inelastic demand curve
Quantity demandedDemandPrice ($)P1
P2
O Q1 Q2As the price drops from P1 to
P2, the quantity demanded
rises by a greater proportionfrom 
Q1 to Q2. Examples of
products with high PED arechocolate bars, soft drinks,cars and airline travel
▲ Figure 11.2 A price elastic demand curve
However, there are three special cases which are theoretical possibilities:
» If the PED for a product is equal to 0, then demand is perfectly price 
inelastic — that is, a change in price has no impact on the quantity 
demanded. This suggests that there is absolutely no substitute for such a product, so suppliers can charge whatever price they like (see Figure 11.3).
» If the PED for a product is equal to infi  nity (∞) then demand is perfectly price 
elastic — that is, a change in price leads to zero quantity demanded. This suggests that customers switch to buying other substitute products if suppliers raise their price (see Figure 11.4).
» If the PED for a product is equal to 1 (ignoring the minus sign), then demand 
has unitary price elasticity — that is, the percentage change in the quantity demanded is proportional to the change in the price (see Figure 11.5).
Deﬁ  nition
Unitary price elasticity 
occurs when the percentage change in the quantity demanded (or supplied) is proportional to the change in the price, so there is no change in the sales revenue.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   49 24/01/18   11:21 AM11	 Price	elasticity	of	deMand
50Quantity demandedDemandPrice ($)P2
P1
O QeAs the price increases from P1 to
P2, the quantity demanded
remains unchanged at Qe.
Realistically, demand will
never be completelyindependent of the price level,but the demand forprescription drugs, anti-venomor water would be very priceinelastic
▲ Figure 11.3 The perfectly price inelastic demand curve
Quantity demandedDemandPrice ($)Pe
ODemand only exists at a price
of Pe. A rise in price above Pe
leads to an inﬁnite change in
the quantity demanded. Thissituation will only exist if thereare perfect substitutes readilyavailable on the market
▲ Figure 11.4 The perfectly price elastic demand curve
Demand
OAs the price increases from P1
to P2, the quantity demanded
falls by the same proportion,from 
Q1 to Q2
Quantity demandedQ2 Q1Price ($)P2
P1
▲ Figure 11.5 The unitary price elasticity demand curve
Exam-style questions
1 Assume the price of a sack of rice falls from $25 to $24, resulting in an 
increase in quantity demanded from 850 sacks to 875 sacks per month.
a Calculate the value of price elasticity of demand for the product. [2]b Explain your fi  nding. [2]
2 Explain two reasons why the demand for rice is price inelastic in 
countries like India, Vietnam and China. [4]
Activity
Many governments around the world regularly raise the taxes on tobacco, alcohol and 
petrol. In small groups, discuss the economic reasons for doing so. Use the concept of price elasticity of demand in your arguments.
Activity
Many governments around the world regularly raise the taxes on tobacco, alcohol and 
petrol. In small groups, discuss the economic reasons for doing so. Use the concept of 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   50 24/01/18   11:21 AMDeterminants of price elasticity of demand
51Determinants of price elasticity of demand
There are many interlinked determinants of the PED for a product. These factors 
include the following:
» Substitution — this is the key determinant of the PED for a good or service. 
In general, the greater the number and availability of close substitutes there are for a good or service, the higher the value of its PED will tend to be. This is because such products are easily replaced if the price increases, due to the large number of close substitutes that are readily available. By contrast, products with few substitutes, such as toothpicks, private education and prescribed medicines, have relatively price inelastic demand.
» Income — the proportion of a consumer’s income that is spent on a product 
also affects the value of its PED. If the price of a box of toothpicks or a packet of salt were to double, the percentage change in price would be so insignificant to the consumer’s overall income that quantity demanded would be hardly affected, if at all. By contrast, if the price of an overseas cruise holiday were to rise by 25% from $10,000 to $12,500 per person, this would discourage many customers because the extra $2,500 per ticket has a larger impact on a person’s disposable income (even though the percentage increase in the price of a cruise holiday is much lower than that of a box of toothpicks or a packet of salt). Therefore, the larger the proportion of income that the price of a product represents, the greater the value of its PED tends to be. Of course, those on extremely high levels of income (such as Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos and Warren Buffet — the three richest men on the planet) are probably not responsive to any change in the market price of goods and services!
» Necessity — the degree of necessity of a good or service will affect the value of its PED. Products that are regarded as essential (such as food, fuel, medicines, housing and transportation) tend to be relatively price inelastic because households need these goods and services, and so will continue to purchase them even if their prices rise. By contrast, the demand for luxury products (such as Gucci suits, Chanel handbags and Omega watches) is price elastic as these are not necessities for most households. The degree of necessity also depends on the timeframe in question. For example, demand for fresh flowers on Valentine’s Day and on Mothers’ Day is relatively price inelastic compared to other days. The same applies to peak and off-peak times. For example, many countries operate public transport systems that charge more for travelling during peak time. This is partly due to overcrowding problems during such times, but also because the transport operators know that peak-time travel is more of a necessity than off-peak travel.
» Habits, addictions, fashions and tastes — if a product is habit forming (such as tobacco) or highly fashionable, its PED tends to be relatively price inelastic. Similarly, people who are extremely devoted to a particular hobby (such as sports or music) are more willing to pay, even at higher prices. Hence, the demand from these people is less sensitive to changes in price.
» Advertising and brand loyalty — marketing can have a huge impact on the buying habits of customers. Effective advertising campaigns for certain products not only help to shift the demand curve outwards to the right, but can also reduce the price elasticity of demand for the product. Customers who are loyal to particular brands are less sensitive to a change in their prices, partly because these brands are demanded out of habit and personal preference — in other words, they are the 
▲ Demand for fresh 
flowers on special days like Valentine’s Day and Mother’s Day is relatively price inelastic compared with other days
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   51 24/01/18   11:21 AM11	 Price 	elasticity 	of	deMand
52default choice over rival brands. Examples of brands with a loyal customer following 
include Coca-Cola, Apple, Samsung, Chanel, Toyota and Mercedes-Benz.
» Time — the period of time under consideration can affect the value of PED 
because people need time to change their habits and behavioural norms. Over time, they can adjust their demand based on more permanent price changes by seeking out alternative products. For example, parents with children in private fee-paying schools are unlikely to withdraw their children from school if these establishments raise school fees because this would be very disruptive to their children’s learning. Similarly, owners of private motor vehicles are not likely to get rid of their vehicles simply because of higher fuel prices. However, if there is a continual hike in prices over time, both parents and vehicle owners may seek alternatives. Hence, demand tends to be more price elastic in the long run.
» Durability — some products, such as fresh milk, are perishable (do not last 
very long) but need to be replaced, so they will continue to be bought even if prices rise. By contrast, if the price of consumer durable products (such as household furniture, 4K televisions and motor vehicles) increases, then households may decide to postpone replacing these items due to the high prices involved in such purchases. Therefore, the more durable a product is, the more price elastic its demand tends to be.
» The costs of switching — there may be costs involved for customers who wish to switch between brands or products. In the case of high switching costs, the demand for the product is less sensitive to changes in price — that is, it tends to be price inelastic. For example, manufacturers of smartphones, laptops and digital cameras make it more difficult for their customers to switch between rival brands by supplying different power chargers, memory cards and software. Similarly, mobile phone users and satellite television subscribers are bound by lengthy contracts, so that switching between rival brands or services is made less easy. Such barriers to switching therefore make customers less responsive to higher product prices.
» The breadth of definition of the product — if a good or service is very broadly defined (such as food rather than fruit, meat, apples or salmon), then demand will be more price inelastic. For example, there is clearly no real substitute to food or housing, so demand for these products will be very price inelastic. However, it is perhaps more useful to measure the price elasticity of demand for specific brands or products, such as carbonated soft drinks, Australian beef and IGCSE textbooks.
Study tip
Although there are many determinants of PED, the key factors can be remembered by THIS 
acronym:
• Time
• Habits, addictions and tastes
• Income
• Substitutes (availability and price of)
Exam-style question
The price elasticity of demand for a product known to be –0.3. The product  
is most likely to be:  [1]
A Breakfast cereal
B ElectricityC Running shoes
D Soft drinks
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   52 24/01/18   11:21 AMThe relationship between price elasticity of demand and total revenue
53Case study: Toyota Motor Corporation
Japanese car maker Toyota has seen its fair share of troubles in recent 
times. It has had to deal with several cases of global product recalls for its cars due to safety concerns. The global ﬁ  nancial crisis of 2008 also harmed global sales for several years. On top of that, much of the world’s largest car maker’s stocks of new cars were destroyed in the tsunami of March 2011.
Nevertheless, customer loyalty remains strong in the USA, China and 
many other parts of the world. Toyota’s closest rival, General Motors (GM), estimated the value of customer loyalty at $700 million for every percentage point of improvement in customer retention rates.
Market research from Experian Automotive revealed that 47.3 per cent of 
Toyota’s current customers from the USA would purchase a Toyota, Scion or Lexus model as their next car. Globally, this ﬁ  gure stands at 58 per cent for Toyota and 52 per cent for GM.
Toyota’s use of marketing slogans such as ‘The best built cars in the world’ can certainly go a long way to reassure 
Toyota’s loyal customers about their cars.
Sources: adapted from Wall Street Journal and TIME Business
Activity
Discuss how the concept of price elasticity of demand and its determinants can help to explain why Toyota Motor Corporation is the world’s largest car maker.
Activity
Discuss how the concept of price elasticity of demand and its determinants can help to 
explain why Toyota Motor Corporation is the world’s largest car maker.
The relationship between price elasticity
of demand and total revenue
Knowledge of the price elasticity of demand for a product can be used to assess 
the impact on consumer expenditure and therefore sales revenues following changes in price. Sales revenue is the amount of money received by a supplier from the sale of a good or service. It is calculated by multiplying the price charged for each product by the quantity sold:
Sales revenue = price × quantity demanded
Note that this is not the same as profi  t , which is the numerical difference 
between a fi  rm’s sales revenues and its total costs of production.
For example, if a retailer sells 5000 laptops at $700 each, then its sales 
revenue is $3.5 million. Suppose the retailer reduces its price to $650 and quantity demanded rises to 5500 units in the following quarter. Was this a good business decision? A quick calculation of PED reveals that the demand for the laptops is price elastic:
» Percentage change in quantity demanded = (5500 – 5000)/5000 = +10%
» Percentage change in price = ($650 – $700)/$700 = −7.14%
» Thus, PED = −1.4
This means the PED for the laptops is price elastic. Hence a fall in price causes a relatively large increase in the quantity demanded, so sales revenues should increase. This can be checked as follows:
Deﬁ  nitions
Sales revenue (or total 
revenue) is the sum of money received from the sale of a good or service. It is calculated by the formula: P × Q.Proﬁ  t is the difference between a ﬁ  rm’s total revenues and its total costs. It is calculated using the formula: TR − TC .
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   53 24/01/18   11:21 AM11	 Price 	elasticity 	of	deMand
54Original sales revenue   = $700 × 5000   = $3,500,000
New sales revenue   = $650 × 5500   = $3,575,000
Difference in sales revenue  = $3.575m − $3.5m  =     +$75,000
Given that demand for laptops in the above example is price elastic, a reduction 
in price was a sensible business decision. Therefore, it can be seen that knowledge of PED for a product can inform firms about their pricing strategy in order to maximise sales revenues. 
The relationship between PED and revenue is summarised in Table 11.1 and 
Figures 11.6 and 11.7.
Table 11.1 The relationship between PED and sales revenues
Price change Inelastic demand Unitary demand Elastic demand
Increase price Revenues rise No change in 
revenuesRevenues fall
Reduce price Revenues fall No change in 
revenuesRevenues rise
OHere the demand curve is
relatively price inelastic (ratherunresponsive to changes in price).If the ﬁrm raises its price, thepercentage increase in price is fargreater than the subsequent fall in
demand. Hence, sales revenue will
increase (and vice versa)
Quantity demandedQ2Q1Price ($)P2
P1
LossGainDemand
▲ Figure 11.6 Price inelastic demand and sales revenue
Demand
OHere the demand curve isrelatively price elastic (somewhatresponsive to changes in price). Acut in price will therefore lead to 
a
net gain in sales revenue. Bycontrast, if price were to increasecustomers would simply switch tosubstitutes, thereby generating anet loss in sales revenue
Quantity demandedQ1 Q2Price ($)P1
P2Loss
Gain
▲ Figure 11.7 Price elastic demand and sales revenue
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   54 24/01/18   11:21 AMThe significance of price elasticity of demand for decision makers
55The signiﬁ  cance of price elasticity of 
demand for decision makers
Knowledge of PED has implications for decision making by consumers, producers 
and the government. Essentially, it can provide valuable information about how the demand for different products is likely to change if prices are adjusted. This information can be used in several ways, such as the following:
» Helping producers to decide on their pricing strategy — for example, a business with price inelastic demand for its products is likely to increase prices, knowing that quantity demanded will hardly be affected. Therefore, the fi  rm will benefi  t from higher sales revenue when selling its products at a higher price.
▲ Theme parks charge different prices for essentially the same service. The difference is 
explained by PED
» Predicting the impact on producers following changes in the exchange rate  
(see Chapter 38) — for instance, fi  rms that rely on exports will generally benefi  t 
from lower exchange rates, as exports become cheaper and thus they become more price competitive. This assumes that the PED for exports is price elastic, of course.
» Price discrimination — this occurs when fi  rms charge different customers different prices for essentially the same product because of differences in their PED. For example, theme parks charge adults different prices from children and they also offer discounts for families and annual pass holders.
» Deciding which products to impose sales taxes on — taxing price inelastic products ensures the government can collect large sums of tax revenue without seriously affecting the overall demand for the product (so there is minimal impact on sales revenues and jobs). Producers can also decide how much of the tax can be passed onto customers. For example, products such as alcohol, tobacco and petrol are price inelastic in demand, so government taxes on these products can quite easily be passed onto customers without much impact on the quantity demanded.
» Determining taxation policies — knowledge of PED can help governments to determine taxation policies. For example, the government can impose heavy taxes on demerit goods (see Chapter 14), such as petrol and cigarettes, knowing that the demand for these products is price inelastic.  As demerit goods are harmful to society as a whole, the government needs to impose very high level of taxes on such products in order to reduce the quantity of demand.
Deﬁ  nition
Price discrimination occurs 
when ﬁ  rms charge different customers different prices for essentially the same product due to differences in PED.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   55 24/01/18   11:21 AM11	 Price	elasticity	of	deMand
56
Exam-style questions
Suppose Sharma Fabrics sells 1350 units of wool per month at $4.00 each. 
Following an increase in price to $4.60 per unit, the fi  rm discovers that the quantity demanded falls to 1215 units per month.
a Calculate the price elasticity of demand for wool sold at Sharma Fabrics. [2]
b Explain how knowledge of price elasticity of demand can be of use to 
Sharma Fabrics. [4]
Activity
In small groups, discuss why ﬁ  rms use peak and off-peak pricing strategies, such as 
airline tickets being far more expensive during school holidays. How many examples of price discrimination based on time (peak and off-peak) can your group come up with? Does your group believe that price discrimination is beneﬁ  cial? Justify your argument.
Activity
In small groups, discuss why ﬁ  rms use peak and off-peak pricing strategies, such as 
airline tickets being far more expensive during school holidays. How many examples of 
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by price elasticity of demand (PED) and how is it calculated?2 Why should ﬁ  rms raise prices for products with price inelastic demand, and reduce 
prices for products with price elastic demand?
3 Use a diagram to show the difference between perfectly price elastic demand, unitary 
PED and price inelastic demand.
4 What are the key determinants of PED?5 How might knowledge of PED be of value to producers (ﬁ  rms)?6 How might knowledge of PED be of value to the government?
Revision checklist
✔ Price elasticity of demand (PED) measures the degree of responsiveness 
of the quantity demanded of a product following a change in its price.
✔ PED is calculated using the formula: %ΔQ D/%ΔP
✔ Demand is price elastic if there is a relatively large change in the quantity 
demanded of a product following a relatively small change in its price. 
Hence, if demand is price elastic, ﬁ  rms will tend to reduce prices to increase sales revenue.
✔ Demand is price inelastic if there is a relatively small change in the 
quantity demanded for a product following a relatively large change in its price. Hence, if demand is price inelastic, ﬁ  rms will tend to raise prices to increase sales revenue.
✔ Determinants of PED include: time, habits and tastes, income and 
substitution.
✔ Knowledge of PED enables producers to determine their pricing 
strategies (to maximise sales revenues) and governments to determine their tax policies (to maximise tax revenues).
✔ Knowledge of PED also enables ﬁ  rms to determine whether they can 
use price discrimination (charge different customers different prices for essentially the same product because of differences in their PED).
 Price elasticity of demand (PED) measures the degree of responsiveness 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   56 24/01/18   11:21 AM57
 12  Price elasticity of supply
Price elasticity of supply
Price elasticity of supply (PES) measures the degree of responsiveness of 
quantity supplied of a product following a change in its price. Supply is said to be price elastic if producers can quite easily increase supply without a time delay if there is an increase in the price of the product. This can help to give such fi  rms a competitive advantage as they are able to respond to changes in price. By contrast, supply is price inelastic if fi  rms fi  nd it diffi  cult to change production in a given time period due to a change in the market price.
Calculating price elasticity of supply
Price elasticity of supply is calculated using the formula:
Percentage change in quantity supplied
Percentage change in price
or annotated as:
%ΔQ S
%ΔP
For example, if the market price of beans increases from $2 per kilo to $2.20 per kilo, causing quantity supplied to rise from 10,000 units to 10,500 units then the PES is calculated as:
» Percentage change in quantity supplied = (10,500 – 10,000)/10,000 = +5%
» Percentage change in price = ($2.20 – $2)/$2 = +10%
» PES = +5%/+10% = 0.5
What this means is that the supply of beans is hardly affected by the change in price — that is, supply is relatively price inelastic. Note that the value of PES is positive due to the law of supply — an increase in price tends to increase the quantity supplied (and vice versa).
Interpreting supply curve diagrams and price 
elasticity of supply
The value of PES reveals the degree to which the quantity supplied of a product 
responds to changes in price. The calculation of PES generally has two possible outcomes:
» If PES is greater than 1, supply is price elastic — that is, quantity supplied 
is responsive to changes in price. This is because the percentage change 
Deﬁ  nition
Price elasticity of supply 
(PES) measures the degree of responsiveness of the quantity supplied of a product following a change in its price.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne and calculate price elasticity of supply (PES)
★ draw and interpret supply curve diagrams to show different PES
★ understand the determinants of PES
★ demonstrate the signiﬁ  cance of PES for decision makers.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   57 24/01/18   11:21 AM12	 Price 	elasticity 	of	suPPly
58in quantity supplied is greater than the percentage change in price (see 
Figure 12.1).
» If PES is less than 1, supply is price inelastic — that is, quantity supplied is relatively unresponsive to changes in price. This is because the percentage change in quantity supplied is less than the percentage change in price (see Figure 12.2).
Supply
OIn this case, when price rises from
P1 to P2, there is plenty of spare
capacity for the ﬁrm, so the
quantity supplied can increase by a
greater proportion from Q1 to Q2,
i.e. supply is price elastic.Examples of products with priceelastic supply are mass-producedgoods such as carbonated softdrinks and toothpaste
Quantity suppliedQ1 Q2Price ($)P2
P1
▲ Figure 12.1 A price elastic supply curve
Supply
OIn this case, when price rises from
P1 to P2, there is very little spare
capacity for the ﬁrm, so thequantity supplied can only rise bya smaller proportion from 
Q1 to Q2.
Examples are fresh fruit andvegetables that take time to grow(so supply is relativelyunresponsive to changes in price)
Quantity suppliedQ1Q2Price ($)P2
P1
▲ Figure 12.2 A price inelastic supply curve
However, there are three special cases which are theoretical possibilities for PES:
» If the PES of a product is equal to 0, then supply is perfectly price inelastic — 
that is, a change in price has no impact on the quantity supplied. This suggests that there is absolutely no spare capacity for suppliers to raise output, irrespective of increases in price (see Figure 12.3). 
» If the PES of a product is equal to infinity (∞) then supply is perfectly price elastic — that is, the quantity supplied can change without any corresponding change in price. For example, a software developer selling products online can very easily increase supply to match higher levels of demand, without any impact on the price level. Due to the spare capacity that exists, suppliers are able to raise output at the current price level (see Figure 12.4). 
» If the PES for a product is equal to 1 then supply has unitary price elasticity — that is, the percentage change in the quantity supplied matches the percentage change in price (see Figure 12.5). Any upward-sloping supply curve that starts at the origin will have unitary price elasticity.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   58 24/01/18   11:21 AMCalculating price elasticity of supply
59Supply
OHere, supply is perfectly price
inelastic at Qe. Irrespective of price
changes, the ﬁrm can only supplya maximum of 
Qe, so changes in
price have no impact on thequantity supplied, i.e. 
PES = 0. An
example is a football stadium or aconcert hall that cannotaccommodate more than theseating capacity
Quantity suppliedQePrice ($)P2
P1
▲ Figure 12.3 The perfectly price inelastic supply curve
Supply
OHere, supply is perfectly price elastic ata price of 
Pe. For example, Duracell
might have a huge stock of batteries, soany increase in demand will simplyresult in more Duracell batteries beingsold, without the price being raised.Hence, as quantity supplied canincrease from 
Q1 to Q2 irrespective of a
price change, the PES = ∞Price ($)Pe
Quantity suppliedQ1 Q2
▲ Figure 12.4 The perfectly price elastic supply curve
Any supply curve that starts atthe origin (such as 
S1, S2 or S3)
has a PES value equal to 1.
This theoretical outcomemeans that a change in pricecauses the same proportionalchange in quantity suppliedPrice ($)
O Quantity suppliedS1
S2
S3
▲ Figure 12.5 The unitary price elasticity supply curve
Activity
Discuss in pairs why the price elasticity of supply of the following products will differ:
a Smartphones
b Organic vegetablesc Fresh fl  owersd Hotelse Ferrari cars
Activity
Discuss in pairs why the price elasticity of supply of the following products will differ:
Study tip
In reality, supply curves are 
likely to be non-linear, so will have a different PES value at different points. Supply is more elastic at lower prices and more inelastic at higher prices.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   59 24/01/18   11:21 AM12	 Price	elasticity	of	suPPly
60Exam-style questions
Angry Birds is a highly popular video 
game created by Finnish company Rovio in December 2009 for the iPhone. Since then, over 300 million customers have paid $0.99 each to download the game from Apple’s App Store. The game has become available for other platforms such as Android and Windows operating systems and available for both video games consoles and personal computers. Rovio has since launched variations of the video game, such as Angry Birds Seasons, Angry Birds Rio, Angry Birds Space and Angry Birds Star Wars. According to its website, 200 million people play Angry Birds every month, and the Angry Birds games have been downloaded over 3 billion times across all platforms, making it the most downloaded app of all time.
a With the use of an appropriate diagram, explain why the high level of 
demand for Angry Birds games has no effect on the selling price. [6]
b Analyse how knowledge of price elasticity of supply can help businesses 
such as Rovio. [6]
Determinants of price elasticity of supply
There are several interlinked determinants of the PES for a product. These factors 
include the following:
» The degree of spare productive capacity — if a fi  rm has plenty of spare capacity then it can increase supply with relative ease, without increasing its costs of production. This means that supply is relatively price elastic. For example, Coca-Cola’s bottling plants can produce 10,000 bottles of water in just 60 seconds, so it is very easy for the world’s largest beverage company with plenty of spare productive capacity to respond to changes in price. In general, the supply of goods and services is highly price elastic during an economic recession (see Chapter 29) when there are spare (unused) resources such as land, capital and labour.
» The level of stocks — if a fi  rm has unused raw materials, components and fi  nished products (collectively known as stocks or inventories) that are available for use, then the fi  rm is more able to respond quickly to a change in price as it can supply these stocks on to the market. Not all inventories are sold to consumers — raw materials and components (parts used in the production process, such as gearboxes and motors for cars) are used in the production process. In addition, some types of stock (such as pencils and ball bearings) are easier to store than others (such as fresh milk or organic vegetables), so it will be easier to increase their supply if prices increase. This means that the higher the level of stocks of fi  nished goods (such as cars) that are ready for sale, the more price elastic supply tends to be.
» The number of producers in the industry — the more suppliers of a product there are in the industry, the easier it tends to be for fi  rms to increase 
Deﬁ  nition
Stocks (or inventories) 
are the raw materials, components and ﬁ  nished goods (ready for sale) used in the production process.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   60 24/01/18   11:21 AMThe significance of price elasticity of supply for decision makers
61their output in response to a price increase. For example, there is plenty of 
competition in the restaurant trade, so suppliers will be highly responsive to increases in price. Hence, the greater the number of fi  rms in an industry, the more price elastic supply tends to be. By contrast, high barriers to entry in the pharmaceutical industry mean that there are very few suppliers in the industry, so supply tends to be price inelastic.
» The time period — in the short run, most fi  rms are not able to change their factor inputs, such as the size of their workforce or the fi  xed amount of capital equipment they employ. For example, in agricultural farming, the supply of fresh fruit and vegetables is dependent on the time it takes to harvest the products and climatic conditions beyond the control of the suppliers. Hence, supply is less responsive to changes in price in the short run. Supply is more likely to be price elastic in the long run because fi  rms can adjust their levels of production according to price changes in the market.
» The ease and cost of factor substitution — this refers to the extent to which it is possible to introduce factor resources (such as labour and capital) to the production process. If capital and labour resources are occupationally mobile, this means they can be substituted easily in the production process. For example, capital is occupationally mobile in a publishing company that can switch production quite easily between printing textbooks, magazines, trade journals, calendars and greetings cards. This means the ease of factor substitution in the publishing fi  rm makes supply highly price elastic. By contrast, the PES for a product where capital equipment and labour cannot easily be switched, as the production process is infl  exible, will be very low.
Activity
Explain whether the price elasticity of supply (PES) of the following products is relatively 
price elastic or price inelastic in supply.
a Bananas
b Fresh fl  owersc Computersd Coal
Activity
Explain whether the price elasticity of supply (PES) of the following products is relatively 
price elastic or price inelastic in supply.
The signiﬁ  cance of price elasticity of supply 
for decision makers
In general, it is preferable for producers to have a high PES — that is, to be 
highly responsive to changes in price (and other market conditions). This can help to make fi  rms more competitive and therefore to generate more sales revenue and profi  ts. Firms can become more responsive to changes in market price in several ways, including:
» creating spare capacity
» keeping large volumes of stocks (inventories)
» improving storage systems to prolong the shelf-life of products
» adopting or upgrading to the latest technology
» improving distribution systems (how the products get to the customers)
» developing and training employees to improve labour occupational mobility 
(to perform a range of jobs).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   61 24/01/18   11:21 AM12	 Price	elasticity	of	suPPly
62
Inelastic PES means that higher demand for a product simply causes a 
signifi  cantly higher increase in price, as producers cannot respond immediately by supplying more on the market. This increases profi  t margins, but does not necessarily benefi  t the economy if there is competition (alternative suppliers) from overseas fi  rms.
The government is also interested in PES. For example, in many countries 
inelastic supply of new housing in response to rising demand for housing results in higher property prices. This can widen the wealth gap between those who can afford to own their own homes and those who fi  nd housing unaffordable. The government may therefore need to intervene in the market to ensure everyone has access to affordable housing. 
The government is also interested in PES in labour markets, which is a key 
factor explaining differences in wages. Governments may seek to encourage an infl  ow of migrant workers, to help relieve shortages of labour and improve the PES in the labour market.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by price elasticity of supply (PES) and how is it calculated?
2 Use a diagram to show the difference between perfectly price elastic supply, unitary 
PES and price inelastic supply.
3 Use a diagram to distinguish between price elastic PES and price inelastic PES.4 What are the key determinants of PES?5 If a product has a PES value of 0, what does this actually mean? What about PES = 1 
and PES = ∞?
6 What is the difference between perfectly elastic and perfectly inelastic supply?7 How might knowledge of PES be of value to producers (ﬁ  rms)?8 How might knowledge of PES be of value to the government?
Revision checklist
✔ Price elasticity of supply (PES) measures the degree of responsiveness 
of the quantity supplied of a product following a change in its price.
✔ PES is calculated using the formula: %ΔQ S/%ΔP.
✔ PES is positive due to the law of supply — that is, the positive 
relationship between price and quantity supplied.
✔ If PES is greater than 1, supply is price inelastic — that is, quantity 
supplied is responsive to changes in price.
✔ If PES is less than 1, supply is price inelastic — that is, quantity supplied 
is relatively unresponsive to changes in price. 
✔ If the PES of a product is equal to 0, supply is perfectly price inelastic — 
a change in price has no impact on the quantity supplied.
✔ If the PES of a product is equal to inﬁ  nity (∞), supply is perfectly price 
elastic — the quantity supplied can change without any corresponding 
change in price.
✔ Determinants of PES include: spare capacity, inventory (stock) levels, 
the number of ﬁ  rms in the industry, the ease and the cost of factor substitution, and the time period.
 Price elasticity of supply (PES) measures the degree of responsiveness 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   62 24/01/18   11:21 AM63
 13  Market economic system
The market economic system
An economic system describes the way in which an economy is organised and 
run, including alternative views of how scarce resources are best allocated. A key question in economics is the extent to which a government should intervene in the economy or leave economic agents (households and fi  rms) to operate freely. 
There are three main types of economic system (see Figure 13.1).
Planned Market Mixed
▲ Figure 13.1 Economic systems
1 Market economy — this economic system relies on the market forces of 
demand and supply (in the private sector) to allocate resources with minimal government intervention. Hong Kong is the world’s freest market economy. Singapore and New Zealand are also considered market economies.
▲ Hong Kong is widely accepted as the world’s freest market economy
2 Planned economy — this economic system relies on the government (in the 
public sector) allocating resources. It is often associated with a communist political system that strives for social equality. Examples are North Korea, Venezuela and Cuba.
3 Mixed economy — as its name suggests, this economic system is a 
combination of the planned and market economic system, with some resources being owned and controlled by private individuals and fi  rms, while others are owned and controlled by the government in the public sector. Examples are Japan, Italy and Spain.
Deﬁ  nitions
The private sector refers to 
economic activity of private individuals and ﬁ  rms. The private sector’s main aim is to earn proﬁ  t for its owners.The public sector refers to economic activity directly involving the government, such as the provision of state education and healthcare services. The public sector’s main aim is to provide a service.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne the market economic system
★ explain the advantages of the market economic system
★ explain the disadvantages of the market economic system.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   63 24/01/18   11:21 AM13	 Market 	econo Mic	syste M
64The market economy is central to supply-side economics (see Chapter 28) and 
the associated gains from free international trade (see Chapter 37).
The Heritage Foundation compiles an annual index of economic freedom for all 
countries. Hong Kong has topped the league table as the world’s freest economy 
since records began in 1995, with Singapore being ranked second during the same time period (see Figure 13.2).
1 Hong Kong  89.8
2 Singapore 88.6
3 New Zealand 83.7
4 Switzerland 81.5
5 Australia 81.0
6 Estonia 79.1
7 Canada 78.5
8 United Arab Emirates 76.9
9 Ireland 76.7
10 Chile 76.5Economic freedom
scoring key80–100 Free70–79.9 Mostly free60–69.9 Moderately free50–59.9 Mostly unfree0–49.9 RepressedRanking the world by economic freedom
Top 10 countries
Source: Heritage Foundation, 2017
▲ Figure 13.2 The ‘freest’ economies
According to the Heritage Foundation, there is a high correlation between a 
country’s level of economic freedom and its standard of living (see Chapter 32). Its research data suggest that market economies substantially outperform others in terms of economic growth, healthcare, education, protection of the environment and the reduction of poverty.
Advantages of the market economic system
The market economic system benefits from the following advantages:
» Efficiency — competition helps to ensure private individuals and firms pay attention to what customers want. This helps to stimulate innovation, thereby making market economies more responsive and dynamic.
» Freedom of choice — individuals can choose which goods and services to purchase and which careers to pursue, without being restricted by government regulations.
» Incentives — the profit motive for firms and the possibility for individuals to earn unlimited wealth create incentives to work hard. This helps to boost economic growth and living standards in the country.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   64 24/01/18   11:21 AMDisadvantages of the market economic system
65Disadvantages of the market economic 
system
The market economic system suffers from the following disadvantages:
» Income and wealth inequalities — in a market economic system, the rich 
have far more choice and economic freedom. Production is geared to meet the needs and wants of the wealthy, thus basic services for the poorer members of society may be neglected.
» Environmental issues — there are negative consequences of economic prosperity under the market economic system, such as resource depletion (especially of non-renewable resources), pollution and climate change.
» Social hardship — the absence of government control means that public goods (see Chapter 14), such as street lighting, public roads and national defence, may not be provided. Relief of poverty in society might only be done through voluntary charities.
» Wasteful competition — competitive pressures can mean that fi  rms use up unnecessary resources, such as excess packaging and advertising clutter, to gain competitive advantages over their rivals. Consumers might be exploited by marketing tactics, such as pester power (see the Activity below). The lack of government involvement could also mean that products are less safe for consumers.
Activity
Pester power is the marketing term used 
to describe the ability that children have to persuade their parents to make certain purchasing decisions, perhaps by constant nagging or annoyance.
Use the internet to ﬁ  nd examples of pester power 
and be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with the class.
Activity
Pester power
to describe the ability that children have 
The USA is often given as an example of running a market economic system. 
However, in reality the state and federal governments do get involved in providing some basic services. In effect, the USA is a mixed economic system (see Chapter 15) but with a much larger private sector than many other nations.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by an economic system?
2 What are the three main types of economic system?3 What are the key features of the market economic system?4 What are the advantages of operating a market economy?5 What are the disadvantages of operating a market economy?
Study tip
To better understand the 
contents of this topic, also read Chapters 14 (Market failure) and 15 (Mixed economic system).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   65 24/01/18   11:21 AM13	 Market	econoMic	systeM
66
Exam-style questions
1 Which economic system enables individuals and fi  rms to pursue their 
own best interests?  [1]
A Command economic system 
B Free market economic system C Mixed economic systemD Planned economic system
2 What is an advantage of the market economic system?  [1]
A Government provision of essential servicesB Incentives to workC Maximum pricesD Minimum prices
Activity
Refer to the countries in Figure 13.2. Research the latest data on the real gross 
domestic product per capita of these countries. Discuss whether there is a correlation between their real GDP per capita and the level of economic freedom.
Activity
Refer to the countries in Figure 13.2. Research the latest data on the real gross 
domestic product per capita of these countries. Discuss whether there is a correlation 
Revision checklist
✔ An economic system refers to the way in which an economy is organised 
in terms of how it best allocates scarce resources.
✔ There are three main types of economic system: market economy, 
planned economy and mixed economy.
✔ Advantages of the market economy include: efﬁ  ciency in the use and 
allocation of resources, freedom of choice and incentives to work.
✔ Disadvantages of the market economy include: income and wealth 
inequalities, environmental degradation, depletion of non-renewable 
resources, social hardship and wasteful competition.
 An economic system refers to the way in which an economy is organised 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   66 24/01/18   11:21 AM67
 14  Market failure
Market failure
Market failure occurs when the production and/or consumption of a good or 
service causes additional positive or negative side-effects to a third party not involved in the economic activity. In other words, the market forces of demand and supply fail to allocate resources effi  ciently. For example, in a free market the following situations may arise:
» Education and healthcare services are only provided to those who are willing 
and able to pay, despite the benefi  ts these bring to society as a whole.
» Street lighting and public roads are underprovided as producers cannot exclude 
those who do not pay from benefi  ting from the provision of these services.
» Tobacco, alcohol and gambling are overprovided as there is a lack of government 
intervention to regulate production and consumption levels in these markets.
» Extraction of oil and the construction of offi  ce buildings cause damage to the 
physical environment and a loss of green space.
» Monopolists (see Chapter 23) can abuse their market power, charging 
customers higher prices or supplying lower quantities than if they were faced with competition.
Private and social costs
The private costs of production and consumption are the actual costs of an 
individual fi  rm, household or government. For example, the driver of a car pays for the insurance, licence, petrol and cost of purchasing the car.
The external costs are the negative spillover effects (or side-effects) of 
production or consumption incurred by third parties for which no compensation is paid. For example, a car driver does not pay for the cost of the congestion and air pollution created when driving the car. This is an example of market failure as the private costs (of driving) do not represent the true costs (of driving) to society. The true cost of an economic activity is called the social cost.
Social costs = private costs + external costs
For example, food production from the raising of cattle and other livestock is blamed for causing about a quarter of all greenhouse gas emissions (which create global warming). Such emissions are becoming an increasing problem and create external costs as people become wealthier and eat more meat.
Other examples of external costs are:
» air pollution caused by fumes from a factory
» noise pollution from a nightclub
» cigarette smoke
» advertising clutter (which causes visual blight)
» litter.
Deﬁ  nitions
Market failure occurs 
when the market forces of demand and supply are unsuccessful in allocating resources efﬁ  ciently and cause external costs or external beneﬁ  ts.Private costs of production and consumption are the actual costs of a ﬁ  rm, individual or government.External costs are the negative side-effects of production or consumption incurred by third parties for which no compensation is paid.Social costs are the true (or full) costs of consumption or production to society as a whole, i.e. the sum of private costs and external costs.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne the concept of market failure
★ explain the causes of market failure
★ discuss the consequences of market failure.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   67 24/01/18   11:21 AM14	 Market	failure
68
▲ Litter is an example of an external cost
Private and social beneﬁ  ts
Private benefi  ts are the benefi  ts of production and consumption experienced by 
an individual fi  rm, household or government. For example, a car owner gains the benefi  t of driving the car and owning a means of private transportation. Similarly, a person who owns a garden enjoys the personal benefi  ts of having green space and plants, fl  owers and possibly vegetables.
External benefi  ts are the positive side-effects of production or consumption 
experienced by third parties for which no money is paid by the benefi  ciary. For example, the sight and smell of a well-kept garden gives pleasure to a neighbour or a person walking past. The plants and trees also absorb carbon dioxide and therefore are good for the natural environment. Other examples of services with external benefi  ts are education, training, law enforcement and vaccinations.
When a person has a vaccination against tuberculosis, for example, they 
receive the private benefi  t of being immune to the disease but third parties and society as a whole are also protected from this highly contagious virus. To eradicate diseases, many governments make it a legal requirement for children to be vaccinated against certain diseases before they can start school. Many governments provide vaccines free of charge to children due to the external benefi  ts the vaccinations bring.
This is an example of market failure as there are external benefi  ts to society of 
vaccination programmes. If vaccinations were left to the choice of individuals, they would be under-consumed, mainly due to the price that would be charged for such vaccinations in the free market. The true benefi  t of the vaccination is called the social benefi  t.
Social beneﬁ  t = private beneﬁ  t + external beneﬁ  t
Another example is training programmes, such as fi  rst-aid or coaching skills for employees, which create benefi  ts that can be enjoyed by others in society.
Deﬁ  nitions
Private beneﬁ  ts are the 
beneﬁ  ts of production and consumption enjoyed by a ﬁ  rm, individual or government.External beneﬁ  ts are the positive side-effects of production or consumption experienced by third parties for which no money is paid by the beneﬁ  ciary.Social beneﬁ  ts are the true (or full) beneﬁ  ts of consumption or production, i.e. the sum of private beneﬁ  ts and external beneﬁ  ts.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   68 24/01/18   11:21 AMCauses and consequences of market failure
69
Activity
Discuss with a partner which of the following are examples of products that incur social 
costs or social beneﬁ  ts. Make sure you can explain your answers to each other.
• Dental health check-ups
• Art museums• Consumption of soda/ﬁ  zzy drinks• Overuse of antibiotics• A person driving while smoking or eating• Family planning clinics• Smartphones
Activity
Discuss with a partner which of the following are examples of products that incur social 
costs or social beneﬁ  ts. Make sure you can explain your answers to each other.
Causes and consequences of market 
failure
The free market fails to allocate resources effi  ciently in relation to public goods, 
merit goods, demerit goods, the abuse of monopoly power and factor immobility. The existence of these things in an economy causes market failure. 
Public goods
The private sector fails to provide certain goods and services due to a lack of a profi  t motive. Such goods and services are known as public goods. Examples are:
» street lighting
» road signs
» law and order
» fl  ood control systems
» national defence
» public fi  reworks displays
» lighthouses
» online search engines
» public roads.
Public goods are non-excludable and non-rivalrous in consumption. This means those who do not pay can still enjoy access to the product and there is no competition to purchase or use the product.
Merit goods
Merit goods are deemed to have social benefi  ts yet are under-provided and under-consumed without government intervention or provision. Consumption of merit goods creates positive spillover effects for a third party. Hence, the social benefi  ts of producing and consuming merit goods outweigh the private benefi  ts. Examples are:
» education
» healthcare services
» vaccinations
» research and development
» work-related training schemes
» subsidised housing
» museums
» public libraries.
Deﬁ  nitions
Public goods are goods 
and services that are non-excludable and non-rivalrous, and which are a cause of market failure as there is a lack of a proﬁ  t motive to produce them.Merit goods are goods or services which when consumed create positive spillover effects in an economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   69 24/01/18   11:21 AM14	 Market	failure
70Both the public and private sectors of the economy provide merit goods and 
services. For example, there are private independent schools and people can buy their own private healthcare insurance.
Exam-style questions
1 Explain the difference between public goods and merit goods. [4]
2 Analyse the reasons why a government might choose to provide public goods and merit goods. [6]
Demerit goods
Demerit goods are goods or services which when produced or consumed cause negative spillover effects in an economy. They are a source of market failure because, without government intervention, demerit goods are over-produced and over-consumed. Examples of demerit goods are:
» cigarettes
» alcohol
» recreational drugs
» junk food
» soda/sugary drinks
» gambling.
Case study: Social cost of drones
In May 2017, it was reported that over 240 fl  ights were disrupted in southwestern China 
because of drones interrupting operations at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport. The drones caused 40 fl  ights to land in nearby cities, over 60 fl  ights had to be cancelled, and another 140 fl  ights were delayed. This affected over 10,000 passengers and was the tenth such case in China over a three-month period.
Activity
Discuss whether you think that drones are demerit goods.
Activity
Discuss whether you think that drones are demerit goods.
Abuse of monopoly power
The existence of a monopoly market (see Chapter 23) can also cause market 
failure. Without government control, certain private sector fi  rms could grow to become monopolies and exploit their market power by charging higher prices or reducing supply. In general, profi  t-maximising monopolists lack incentives to be competitive, so create ineffi  ciencies in the market.
Factor immobility
A fi  nal cause of market failure is factor immobility. This occurs when it is diffi  cult for factors of production (see Chapter 2) to move or switch between different uses or locations. Factor immobility results in the free market being unable to provide an effi  cient allocation of resources. For example, capital immobility could be a result of the time and/or costs involved in changing or updating machinery, tools and equipment. There are two types of factor immobility: geographical and occupational.
Deﬁ  nition
Demerit goods are goods 
or services which when consumed cause negative spillover effects in an economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   70 24/01/18   11:21 AMCauses and consequences of market failure
71» Geographical immobility — this occurs when it is diffi  cult to move a factor 
of production from one geographical location to another. For example, workers (labour) might not be willing to move to another part of the country due to family and social ties.
» Occupational immobility — this occurs when it is diffi  cult to move a factor of production from one type of work or job role to another. For example, a skills mismatch can lead to structural unemployment (see Chapter 30).
See Chapter 15 to read about government intervention to address market failures.
Case study: The Deepwater Horizon disaster
On 20 April 2010, an explosion on an oil rig owned by the 
multinational company BP caused approximately 4 million barrels of oil to spill into the Gulf of Mexico. Eleven oil rig workers died in the accident. The impact on the natural environment, people and businesses in the area was immense. Many people, including ﬁ  shermen, dock workers, restaurant owners and their employees, lost their livelihoods and jobs. The damage to the surrounding coastline and wildlife was dramatic. There were endangered species of turtles and a rare species of sea horse which lived in the area, so measures had to be taken to ensure their survival. Around 100,000 people have attempted to claim compensation from BP and many claims are still unresolved today. BP estimated that total damages would cost the ﬁ  rm $42 billion. 
Case study: The Brazilian rainforests
According to Greenpeace, Brazilian supermarkets have banned the sale of meat produced from animals raised in rainforests. This is a move to reduce the amount of rainforest used for pasture for animals and soy plantations.
Activity
Read the case studies on the Deepwater Horizon disaster and the Brazilian rainforests and identify as many examples of market failure and economic concepts as possible.
Activity
Read the
and identify as many examples of market failure and economic concepts as possible.
Activity
Discuss whether it is sustainable for supermarkets to put the planet before their own proﬁ  ts.
Activity
Discuss whether it is sustainable for supermarkets to put the planet before their 
own proﬁ  ts.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   71 24/01/18   11:21 AM14	 Market	failure
72
Exam-style question
Which item is not a public good?  [1]
A Lighthouse
B MuseumC Public roadD Street lighting
Chapter review questions
 1 When and why does market failure occur?
 2 Give three examples of market failure.
 3 What are the differences between private external and social costs?
 4 What are the differences between private external and social beneﬁ  ts?
 5 What are public goods?
 6 What are the differences between merit and demerit goods?
 7 What are the social beneﬁ  ts of public provision of education?
 8 What is meant by the abuse of monopoly power?
 9 How does factor immobility cause market failure?
10 Distinguish between occupational and geographic mobility.
Revision checklist
✔ Market failure occurs when the production and/or consumption of a good 
or service causes positive or negative side-effects to a third party.
✔ Private costs (of production and consumption) are the actual costs of an 
individual ﬁ  rm, household or government.
✔ External costs are the negative spillover effects (or side-effects) of 
production or consumption incurred by third parties, without any 
compensation paid.
✔ The true cost of an economic activity is called the social cost, which 
comprises both private and external costs.
✔ Private beneﬁ  ts are the beneﬁ  ts of production and consumption 
experienced by an individual ﬁ  rm, household or government.
✔ External beneﬁ  ts are the positive side-effects of production or 
consumption experienced by third parties.
✔ The true value of an economic activity is called the social beneﬁ  t, which 
comprises both private and external beneﬁ  ts.
✔ Causes of market failure include: public goods, merit goods, demerit 
goods, abuse of monopoly power and factor immobility.
 Market failure occurs when the production and/or consumption of a good 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   72 24/01/18   11:21 AM73
 15  Mixed economic system
Mixed economic system
The mixed economic system is a combination of both the planned economy 
and the market economy. The degree of public and private sector involvement in economic activity is determined by the government. Essential services, such as state education, healthcare and postal services, are provided by the public sector. The government exists to redistribute income and wealth by providing unemployment benefi  ts and state pensions, for example. In the private sector, profi  t acts as the motive for fi  rms to provide the goods and services demanded by consumers.
In the UK and France, the public sector accounts for around 45 per cent of their 
respective gross domestic product (GDP), so both are good examples of mixed economies. Other examples are Australia, Iceland, Sweden and Italy.
The mixed economic system achieves the best of both the planned and market 
economic systems (see Chapter 13). For example, necessary services are provided for everyone while most other goods and services are competitively marketed. Producers and workers have incentives to work hard, to invest and to save. There is large degree of economic freedom with plenty of choice for private individuals and fi  rms.
The disadvantages of the extreme economic systems also apply to the mixed 
economy. For example, consumers still pay higher prices due to the profi  t motive of private sector businesses. Public sector activities must also be funded by taxes and other government fees and charges.
Exam-style questions
The Economist Intelligence Unit rankings of the world’s top education systems, which combine international test results and data such as graduation rates, showed that two contrasting economies topped the league table: Finland and South Korea. The report concluded that while the amount of spending on education is important, it is less infl  uential than an economy having a culture that is supportive of learning. Education in Finland is 100 per cent state funded and is rather unorthodox given that students don’t start schooling until 7 and rarely have tests or homework until their teenage years. In South Korea, education is crucial for success, so there are huge pressures placed on students, who start school aged 3. Testing is regular and rigorous, making after-school private tuition classes extremely popular. According to the report, the top 10 countries were ranked as follows:By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne the mixed economic system
★ explain maximum and minimum prices
★ discuss government intervention to address market failure.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   73 24/01/18   11:21 AM15	 Mixed	econoMic	systeM
74 1 Finland
 2 South Korea 3 Hong Kong 4 Japan 5 Singapore 6 UK 7 Netherlands 8 New Zealand 9 Switzerland10 Canada
a Explain how scarce resources are allocated in a mixed economy. [4]b Discuss whether education should be funded by the government. [8] 
Study tip
Rarely do countries fall 
perfectly into the categories of planned and market economies. In reality, most countries tend be mixed economies with a stronger element of either command or free-market policies.
Activity
Use the internet to ﬁ  nd relevant economic data for two different countries (for example, 
North Korea and Hong Kong) to distinguish between the two main types of economic system. You might also ﬁ  nd it useful to look at newspaper articles on current topics related to economic systems.
Activity
Use the internet to ﬁ  nd relevant economic data for two different countries (for example, 
North Korea and Hong Kong) to distinguish between the two main types of economic 
Maximum prices
A maximum price is a method of price control which involves the government 
setting the price below the market equilibrium price in order to make products more affordable and encourage consumption. It is also used to protect the interest of consumers from soaring prices, such as escalating rents or higher food prices.
In Figure 15.1, the imposition of a maximum price of P
2 (below the market 
equilibrium price of P e) reduces supply to S 1, while demand expands to D 1. This 
results in excess demand for the product — in other words, there is a shortage.
Quantity (units)Excess
demandMaximum price
S1 D1Price ($)Pe
DS
P2
O
▲ Figure 15.1 Imposition of a maximum price
Consumers can benefi  t from the lower price after the imposition of the maximum price. For example, they can benefi  t from the lower prices of food products or rent 
Deﬁ  nition
A maximum price occurs 
when the government sets a price below the market equilibrium price in order to encourage consumption.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   74 24/01/18   11:21 AMMinimum prices
75on housing. For exporters, a maximum price imposed on the exchange rate (see 
Chapter 38) can help to improve their international competitiveness.
However, price ceilings distort market forces and therefore can result in an 
ineffi  cient allocation of scarce resources. For example, a maximum price to control residential rents would result in more demand (D
1) than is supplied at the lower 
price (P 2). This results in excess demand, as was shown in Figure 15.1. This 
shortage is made up by government supplying housing at a price of P 2 to stabilise 
rents in the economy.
In product markets, one drawback of imposing maximum prices is that they can 
cause unoffi  cial or parallel markets to appear due to the resulting shortages in supply.
Minimum prices
A minimum price refers to the imposition of a price guarantee set above the market price to encourage supply of a certain good or service. For example, farmers could be offered prices above the market equilibrium to boost supply of agricultural output. Alternatively, workers could be offered a wage rate higher than the market rate to create incentives to work or to enable them to earn a liveable minimum wage. 
In Figure 15.2, a minimum price is offered to agricultural farmers, giving them 
an incentive to supply more (S
1) than the market equilibrium (Q e). At a price 
higher than the equilibrium, demand contracts from Q e to D 1, but supply extends 
to S 1. This results in excess supply, as shown by the shaded area. The surplus is 
bought at a price of P 2 by the government to support the agricultural farmers, and 
released on to the market during times of bad harvests to stabilise food prices.
Quantity (units)Minimum price
D1QeS1Price ($)P2
DS
P1
OExcess
supply
▲ Figure 15.2 Imposition of a minimum price
This also applies in the labour market, where more workers supply their labour services if there is a minimum wage (see Figure 15.3). The national minimum wage (NMW) is imposed above the equilibrium wage rate, to ensure all workers have a decent liveable income. However, this results in the supply of labour (S
L) 
exceeding the demand for labour (D L). The NMW results in higher costs of labour, 
which causes unemployment.
Deﬁ  nition
A minimum price occurs 
when the government sets a price above the market equilibrium price in order to encourage output of a certain good or service.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   75 24/01/18   11:21 AM15	 Mixed 	econo Mic	syste M
76Quantity (labour)unemploymentNMW
DL SLDLSL
OWage rate ($)
▲ Figure 15.3 Consequences of a minimum wage in the labour market
Government intervention to address 
market failure
In addition to using maximum and minimum prices to correct market failures, 
governments can also use a combination of other methods: indirect taxation, subsidies, regulation, privatisation, nationalisation, and direction provision of goods and services.
Indirect taxation
One way to solve market failure is to place an indirect tax (see Chapter 26) on demerit goods, such as cigarettes, with the aim of reducing demand for these products.
Price of cigarettes ($)
Quantity of cigarettesS1Stax
Q2Q1P2
P1
ODTax
▲ Figure 15.4 The impact of an indirect tax on cigarettes
In Figure 15.4, the indirect tax imposed on a packet of cigarettes causes the supply curve to shift from S
1 to S tax. As a result, price increases from P 1 to P 2 and 
the quantity of cigarettes demanded decreases from Q 1 to Q 2. The demand for 
cigarettes tends to be price inelastic (see Chapter 11) and therefore the percentage change in quantity demanded is less than the percentage increase in price. This means the tax has to be very high to have any impact on reducing the consumption of cigarettes.
The advantages of imposing an indirect tax on a good or service include the 
following:
» It increases the price, so should reduce the quantity demanded.Study tip
Whether an NMW causes 
unemployment is debatable and empirical studies are not conclusive. The higher wage rate fuels consumption in the economy, thereby creating employment opportunities in the long run. The government might also have other priorities, including to correct market failure in the labour market, such as the exploitation of low-skilled labour, to combat poverty in the economy or to create greater incentives to work.
Study tip
Remember that the level of 
taxation is measured by the vertical distance between the two supply curves. The consumer pays the increase in price (P
2 − P 1) 
and the producer pays the remainder. The more price inelastic the demand for the product, the greater the proportion of the tax paid by the consumer.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   76 24/01/18   11:21 AMGovernment intervention to address market failure
77» It generates tax revenue for the government which can be used to fund 
important goods and services.
The disadvantages of imposing an indirect tax on a good or service are as follows:
» The demand for cigarettes, alcohol and petrol (gas for a car) tends to be price 
inelastic, which means that the increase in price may have little impact on the 
consumption level of many people. In the case of cigarettes, the nicotine in cigarettes makes smoking highly addictive and therefore most smokers will pay the higher price, so consumption will change only slightly.
» The indirect tax will be regressive (see Chapter 26), so will have a greater 
impact on low income earners than high income earners.
Exam-style questions
Traffi  c congestion in central London has fallen since the introduction of a congestion charge for driving into the central business district. It costs £11.50 (approximately $15) each day to drive into the restricted area during peak hours (between 7 a.m. and 6 p.m. on weekdays). There is a penalty of between £65 (around $85) and £195 ($250) for late payment of the charge.
a Explain, using an example, an external cost of driving a car. [2]
b Analyse the advantages and disadvantages of the congestion charge for 
two different stakeholders. [6]
c Discuss whether you think the congestion charge is a long-term or 
short-term solution to the problem of traffi  c congestion in London. [8]
Subsidies
Governments often provide subsidies to encourage the consumption of certain goods 
and services. For example, public transport might be subsidised to discourage people from using private cars. Figure 15.5 shows the impact of a subsidy on the market for 
public transport. The bus and railway fi  rms receive a sum of money from the government which lowers their production costs and causes the supply curve to shift from S
1 (before subsidy) to S 2 (after 
subsidy). Price falls from P 1 to P 2 and the 
quantity demanded increases from Q 1 to 
Q2. An increase in the use of public 
transport should lower congestion, and reduce the amount of pollution caused by driving cars. Therefore, the subsidy reduces external costs created by driving.
Case study: Flu vaccines in Hong Kong
The Hong Kong government subsidises the cost of annual fl  u vaccines for the very young 
and the elderly to encourage people in high-risk age groups to get vaccinated. The aim is to reduce the amount of fl  u in the wider community by targeting these age groups, so that fewer people need to be hospitalised for the treatment of fl  u. Vaccinations create positive spillover effects for the rest of the economy and result in less pressure on healthcare services.
Quantity of public transportQ1Q2S2S1Price of
public
transport ($)P1
Dsubsidy
P2
O
▲ Figure 15.5 The effects of a producer subsidyStudy tip
The level of a subsidy is 
measured by the vertical distance between the two supply curves. The producer receives payment from the government and passes some of this income to consumers in the form of lower prices (shown by the distance between P
1 and P 2 
in Figure 15.5) and keeps the remainder.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   77 24/01/18   11:21 AM15	 Mixed	econoMic	systeM
78Rules and regulations
Governments can also impose rules and regulations in an attempt to solve market 
failure. For example, imposing laws on the minimum age that people must be before they are legally allowed to purchase cigarettes or alcohol may reduce the consumption of such demerit goods. Laws can also restrict where people can smoke. In many countries, smoking is banned in public places such as shopping centres, bars, restaurants, airports, railways stations and even at the beach.
▲ Laws restrict where people are allowed to 
smokeP1
P2
Q2 Q1D2S
D1Price of cigarettes ($)
Quantity of cigarettesO
▲ Figure 15.6 Impact of rules and regulations on the demand for cigarettes
Figure 15.6 illustrates the impact of a ban on smoking in public places. The 
inconvenience causes the demand curve for cigarettes to shift to the left from D 1 
to D 2, resulting in the quantity of cigarettes demanded falling from Q 1 to Q 2.
Other examples of laws and regulations imposed to correct market failures are:
» laws regulating where people can drive, cycle and gamble
» regulations imposed to make sure children are vaccinated against certain 
diseases
» laws making it illegal for people to eat or to talk on a mobile phone while 
driving
» motorcyclists being made to wear a helmet and car passengers having to wear 
seat belts
» airport authorities regulating the number of night fl  ights.
Activity
If alcohol has negative spillover effects, discuss why more countries do not ban the sale 
of alcohol. 
Activity
If alcohol has negative spillover effects, discuss why more countries do not ban the sale 
of alcohol. 
Case study: Compulsory education
Parents in the UK are ﬁ  ned if they do not send their children to school. This rule is designed to improve the uptake of education. Since 2015, full-time education in the UK has been compulsory for children up to 18 years of age.
Activity
Investigate the laws and regulations in your country that are used to correct market failures. How effective have these laws and regulations been?
Activity
Investigate the laws and regulations in your country that are used to correct market 
failures. How effective have these laws and regulations been?
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   78 24/01/18   11:21 AMGovernment intervention to address market failure
79The advantages of imposing rules and regulations to correct market failures are as 
follows:
» Consumption of the good or service may be reduced.
» Awareness of the negative impacts of demerit goods (such as drinking and driving) can help to change the behaviour of people in the long term.
» Awareness of the positive impacts of consuming merit goods (such as education) is raised.
The disadvantages of imposing rules and regulations to correct market failures are as follows:
» Restrictions cause underground (illegal) markets to provide the good or service, often at a very high price.
» The government has no control over the quality of the goods produced in underground markets, which in some cases can be dangerous for consumption — for example, illegally distilled vodka or tainted baby milk powder.
» People break the rules — for example, under-age smokers and alcohol drinkers can bypass the law by obtaining false ID cards.
» The fine or punishment for ignoring the rules and regulations must be enforced and set sufficiently high to discourage consumption of the good or service.
Education
To correct market failures, the government can insist that schools educate students about the negative side-effects of smoking and passive smoking. In many countries, cigarette packets must carry a government health warning which clearly explains the dangers of smoking. The Australian government has made it a legal requirement for cigarettes to be sold in packets covered with negative images about smoking (see below). The images are graphic with the aim of educating and shocking people in order to discourage them from smoking. If these methods are successful, the raised awareness of the dangers of smoking should reduce the demand for cigarettes (or any other demerit good).
▲ Cigarettes in Australia are sold in identical olive-brown packets with the same typeface and 
covered with graphic images and health warnings. In the UK, a ban on tobacco products being displayed in shops came into effect in 2012
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   79 24/01/18   11:21 AM15	 Mixed	econoMic	systeM
80Another example is the government using informative advertising and education 
to explain the benefi  ts of eating at least fi  ve portions of fruits and vegetables each day. In Figure 15.7, the demand curve for fresh fruit and vegetables shifts from D
1 to D 2 and the equilibrium quantity increases from Q 1 to Q 2. Healthier 
people in the economy should mean less absence from work and school, resulting in improved productivity. Therefore, healthy eating produces an external benefi  t for society.
D1D2Price of fruit and vegetables ($)
Quantity of fruit and vegetablesS
O Q1 Q2
▲ Figure 15.7 The impact of positive advertising on demand for fruit and vegetables
Schools around the world educate students about issues such as healthy eating, the negative impacts of driving gas/petrol-fuelled cars and the importance of conserving energy and recycling. Regulating such educational programmes should change the pattern of demand, thus helping to correct market failures.
Activity
Consider whether smoking is a problem in your country. Assess the degree of 
effectiveness of the measures taken by the government to reduce the number of smokers. What possible improvements could be made to the current situation? Take action by writing a letter to a local politician or a newspaper explaining your suggestions.
Activity
Consider whether smoking is a problem in your country. Assess the degree of 
effectiveness of the measures taken by the government to reduce the number of 
Privatisation and nationalisation
Privatisation refers to the transfer of the ownership of assets from the public 
sector to the private sector. For example, Hong Kong’s MTRC was wholly owned by the government, but was privatised on 5 October 2000, raising U$1.22 billion from the sale to shareholders. This decision was part of the government’s plan to wind down its interest in public utilities.
Case study: Privatisation in Hong Kong
The MTR Corporation Limited is a publically listed company on the Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange. The MTRC operates Hong Kong’s railway services, as well as being a major property developer. The company was privatised in October 2000, having raised HK$9.4 billion (US$1.22bn) in its initial public offering. The MTRC also has investments in railways in Beijing, Hangzhou, London, Melbourne, Shenzhen, Stockholm and Sydney.
Deﬁ  nition
Privatisation is the transfer 
of the ownership of assets from the public sector to the private sector.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   80 24/01/18   11:21 AMGovernment intervention to address market failure
81Advantages of privatisation include the following:
» The ability to earn one-off privatisation proceeds from the sale of state-owned 
assets.
» Privatisation helps to reduce government debt in three ways: the government 
no longer has to maintain the operation of state-owned enterprises, it earns 
revenue from the sale of the privatised business, and the private sector fi  rm pays corporate taxes.
» It also reduces costs to taxpayers, who no longer have to pay to fi  nance the 
operations of the business.
» Private sector businesses have the incentive to improve effi  ciency, as they need 
to remain competitive. This can also promote an enterprising culture of risk-taking and innovation.
Disadvantages of privatisation include the following:
» The process creates a private sector monopolist, which is not always a positive 
outcome for customers, who will face higher prices.
» To protect the public interest, privatisation may still require government 
regulation and intervention.
» There is a trade-off (opportunity cost) as state-owned enterprises can provide 
social benefi  ts, such as education, housing, postal services and public transport.
Activities
1 In small groups, discuss whether countries should privatise their postal services and 
telecommunications services in the digital twenty-ﬁ  rst century.
2 Do you think that all schools and universities in your country should be privatised? Consider the impact of privatising education on different stakeholders: consumers, workers, ﬁ  rms, the government and the economy (society) as a whole.
Activities
1
In small groups, discuss whether countries should privatise their postal services and 
telecommunications services in the digital twenty-ﬁ  rst century.
Despite the arguments in favour of privatisation, the 2008 global fi  nancial crisis 
caused many banks to be bailed out (nationalised), making nationalisation popular again as a method of correcting market failure and ineffi  ciencies in the economy. Nationalisation is the purchase of private sector assets by the government, bringing them into the ownership and control of the public sector. This can protect employment and promote economic stability in key industries. Industries that are usually nationalised include public transport, telecommunication networks, energy, utilities and natural resources. There is a rather large opportunity cost, however. For example, according to the Guardian, the UK spent around 20 per cent of its GDP on bank bailouts following the global fi  nancial crisis.
Direct provision
In many countries, governments provide certain goods and services free of charge to their citizens, even though people may have indirectly paid for these through income tax. Examples are: education, healthcare, public libraries, parks, museums, public roads and motorways (highways), garbage or refuse collection, street lighting, street signs and national defence.
Deﬁ  nition
Nationalisation is the 
purchase of private sector assets by the government.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   81 24/01/18   11:21 AM15	 Mixed 	econo Mic	syste M
82
▲ Battleships are funded by the public sector from its national defence budget. HMS Belfast was used during the Second World 
War but has been decommissioned now and is used as a museum
There is a conflict between the provision of goods and services directly to 
people and asking them to pay for the goods and services. The law of demand (see Chapter 7) dictates that as the price of a good or service rises, less will be consumed. Healthcare and education are under-consumed in some countries because people cannot afford to pay. This has a negative effect on the quality of their lives in the short term, and in the long term causes a potential decrease in life expectancy and earning potential. This has a negative impact on the whole of society as human resources are not being used to their full capacity.
The advantages of direct government provision of goods and services are as 
follows:
» The goods and services are accessible to all people in society, regardless of their income or social status.
» Consumption of the good or service has private benefits for the individual and external benefits for third parties in society.
The disadvantages of government provision of goods and services are as follows:
» There is an opportunity cost as the money could have been spent on something else, such as paying off government debt or possibly reducing rates of taxation.
» Goods and services which are free of charge may be over-consumed, so long queues or shortages may arise — for example, the waiting list for hip replacement operations in a government hospital may be very long.
» In the case of a shortage of supply caused by excess demand, it can be difficult to decide who should be able to take advantage of the free government service.
» Some people (known as free riders) are able to take advantage of free goods and services without contributing to government revenue by paying taxes.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   82 24/01/18   11:21 AMGovernment intervention to address market failure
83Chapter review questions
 1 What is meant by a mixed economic system?
 2 What are the advantages and disadvantages of operating a mixed economic system?
 3 What is meant by a maximum price, and why might governments impose this?
 4 What is meant by a minimum price, and why might governments impose this?
 5 Why might a national minimum wage, set above the market equilibrium, cause 
unemployment?
 6 How does indirect taxation work to correct certain market failures?
 7 How might subsidies be used to correct certain market failures?
 8 How might the use of rules and regulation help to correct certain market failures?
 9 How might the use of education and advertising reduce the consumption of 
cigarettes?
10 What is the difference between privatisation and nationalisation with regard to the 
correction of market failure?
Revision checklist
✔ The mixed economic system is a combination of both the planned 
economy and the market economy.
✔ A maximum price is a price control system that involves setting the price 
below the market equilibrium price in order to make products more 
affordable.
✔ A minimum price is the imposition of a price guarantee set above the 
market price to encourage supply of a certain good or service.
✔ Excess supply occurs when a minimum price is imposed above the 
market equilibrium price, as supply exceeds demand at higher prices.
✔ Consumers tend to pay higher prices if minimum prices are imposed.
✔ An indirect tax causes costs of production to increase, thereby shifting 
the supply curve of demerit goods to the left. This results in a higher equilibrium price and a contraction in demand.
✔ Subsidies can be used to lower the cost of providing merit goods and 
services. This helps to cut prices and encourage demand for such socially beneﬁ  cial products.
✔ Rules and regulation can limit access to certain goods and services that 
have negative externalities, such as tobacco, alcohol and gambling.
✔ Privatisation is the transfer of the ownership of assets from the public 
sector to the private sector . It can help to correct market failures by making resource allocation more efﬁ  cient as the private sector has incentives to be innovative and competitive.
✔ Nationalisation is the purchase of private sector assets by the 
government, bringing these into the ownership and control of the public sector . This can protect employment and promote economic stability in key industries.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-02.indd   83 24/01/18   11:21 AMThis page intentionally left blank85
SECTION 3
Microeconomic 
decision makers
Chapters
16 Money and banking
17 Households18 Workers19 Trade unions20 Firms21 Firms and production22 Firms’ costs, revenue and objectives23 Market structure
The micro economy is a vital area of study of economics. 
This section looks at the role of the major decision makers in the micro economy: households, workers, trade unions, banks and ﬁ  rms. Hence, topics studied in this section of the syllabus include: money and banking; inﬂ  uences on household spending, saving and borrowing; factors affecting an individual’s choice of occupation; wage determination and wage differentials; the division of labour/specialisation; the role of trade unions in the economy; the various classiﬁ  cation of ﬁ  rms; economies/diseconomies of scale; production and productivity; and market structures. Students will also be expected to carry out basic calculations of costs and revenues.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   85 24/01/18   11:22 AM86
 16  Money and banking
The meaning of money
Money refers to any commodity that can be used as a medium of exchange that 
is widely accepted for the purchase of goods and services. In today’s modern society, money includes offi  cially issued banknotes and coins (collectively called legal tender), gold and bank account deposits.
Forms of money
Money, being a medium of change, can take different forms. Commodities such as cloth, shells and even salt have all been used as money in the past in different parts of the world. Today, the main forms of money include the following:
» Cash — banknotes and coins are a physical form of money. While cash is 
convenient for many transactions, it is inconvenient and risky to use cash for larger transactions. Hence, in the UK, for example, cash accounts for less than 3 per cent of the country’s total money supply.
» Bank deposits — these are money reserves placed in commercial bank 
accounts. This form of money accounts for the vast majority of all money in modern economies. Commercial bank money is in electronic form, rather than physical form. Instead of carrying large amounts of cash, customers use credit and debit cards or make online bank transfers, which allow money to be transferred electronically between bank accounts.
» Central bank reserves — these consist of the money held by the central bank 
and used by commercial banks to make payments between themselves. Like bank deposits, central bank reserves are electronic forms of money, rather than existing in physical form.
Functions of money
There are four key functions of money:
» Money acts as a medium of exchange — money functions as a way to conduct 
trade. It is widely recognised and accepted as a means of payment for goods and services.
» Money is a measure of value (or unit of account) — it measures the market 
value of different goods and services. It is far more effi  cient for trading purposes to express the price of goods and services in dollars (or other currency) rather than using products such as cloth, shells, salt or livestock — all of which were ancient forms of money.
» Money is a store of value — it can be stored and used at some time in the 
future. In other words, money must be able to hold its purchasing power over time. Money therefore gives fi  rms and households fl  exibility in the timing of their sales and their purchases, thus removing the urgency to trade straightaway.
Deﬁ  nition
Money is any commodity 
that can be used as a medium of exchange for the purchase of goods and services, e.g. banknotes and coins.
Study tip
Money is not simply 
cash (notes and coins) in circulation. In fact, most of an economy’s money exists not in the form of cash, but as bank deposits and reserves.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand the forms, functions and characteristics of money
★ explain the role and importance of central banks
★ explain the role and importance of commercial banks.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   86 24/01/18   11:22 AMThe meaning of money
87» Money is a standard of deferred payment — this means that money is used 
as the standard for future (deferred) payments of debt. For example, loans 
taken out today are repaid in the foreseeable future. Thus, money is used as the standard to pay off debts.
Activity
To appreciate the need for money, try to explain why many economists argue that the 
invention of money is certainly one of the greatest inventions of all time.
Activity
To appreciate the need for money, try to explain why many economists argue that the 
invention of money is certainly one of the greatest inventions of all time.
Characteristics of money
Money has certain characteristics:
» Durability — money, such as banknotes and coins, should be fairly long 
lasting yet easily replaced if it becomes worn. A typical US dollar bill can be 
folded forward and back around 4000 times before it will tear. According to the USA’s Federal Reserve, the typical $50 bill and $100 bill last 9 years before they need replacing and its coins survive in circulation for about 30 years. Modern-day banknotes are made from polymer rather than paper. Polymer banknotes, fi  rst introduced in Australia in 1988, are signifi  cantly more durable and are used extensively in many countries, including Bermuda, New Zealand, Romania and Vietnam.
▲ Polymer banknotes are widely used in Singapore, Brunei, Hong Kong and Australia
» Acceptability — money is widely recognised and accepted as a medium of 
payment for goods and services. Legal tender is the offi  cial money of a country (such as Canada’s dollar or the UK’s pound sterling). Other forms of money might also be accepted, such as tourists using US dollars. Gold is universally accepted as a form of money. By contrast, the Zimbabwean dollar ceased to 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   87 24/01/18   11:22 AM16	 Money	and	banking
88be accepted as a medium of exchange in 2009 when the country, which was 
suffering from civil unrest, experienced hyperinfl  ation (see the case study).
Case study: Hyperinflation in Zimbabwe
In October 2008, Zimbabweans needed Z$2,621,984,228 to purchase 1 US dollar worth 
of goods. Hyperinfl  ation peaked a month later in November 2008 when average prices in Zimbabwe rose by 79,600,000 per cent within a month.
» Divisibility — as money is a measure of the value of goods and services, it 
must be divisible. Many economists and historians believe that cattle are the 
oldest form of money, with cows being used for trade as far back as 9000 BC. 
Cattle were still being used as money in some African nations during the latter half of the twentieth century. However, cattle and livestock are not ‘useful’ forms of money as they are not truly divisible (a third of a cow is not really useful for any trader!).
» Uniformity — for money to be easily recognisable there must be uniformity. 
This means that all $50 banknotes will look identical in terms of shape, size and design. The same applies to all legal tender denominations of banknotes and coins. Cows come in many sizes and shapes and each has a different value; cows are not a uniform form of money. The fi  rst consistent form of money, cowry shells, was used in China over 3200 years ago. These seashells were used mainly for trading food, livestock and textiles.
» Scarcity — money must be limited in supply in order to keep its value. Both 
seashells and salt have been used as money in the past, although the high levels of supply meant they soon lost much of their value as a medium of exchange. By contrast, silver and gold are better types of money due to their scarcity. The supply of money, including banknotes and coins, is regulated by the country’s central bank so that the money retains its value over time by being relatively scarce.
▲ Cowry shells were used as money in sixteenth-century China
» Portability — money must be conveniently portable. For example, the 
approximate weight of a banknote, regardless of its denomination, is just 1 gram. While almost every country uses government-issued banknotes and 
▲ Gold is universally accepted 
as a form of money
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   88 24/01/18   11:22 AMThe meaning of money
89coins as their offi  cial currency, there are other forms of money. For example, 
money in bank accounts and the use of credit cards enable payment to be made electronically, without the customer having to use physical cash. The fi  rst coins used as money appeared around 2000 
BC. In those days, the value of coins was 
determined by their weight, which hindered their effectiveness as money due to the diffi  culties of portability.
Activities 
1 Use the internet to fi  nd out about the hyperinfl  ation experienced in Zimbabwe, which 
lasted around 5 years. 
a Why did the Zimbabwean dollar cease to be used as money? 
b Why do many Zimbabweans today still prefer to use currencies from other 
nations, such as the US dollar?
2 Discuss with a partner or as a class why the following products would not make 
‘good’ money. Try to rank the products in order of how many functions and characteristics of money they meet. Remember to justify your answers.a Milk b Cloth
c Fish d Cigarettes
Activities 
1
 Use the internet to fi  nd out about the hyperinfl  ation experienced in Zimbabwe, which 
lasted around 5 years. 
In the absence of money, people have to use a barter system in order to trade 
goods and services. Bartering is the act of swapping items in exchange for other items through a process of bargaining and negotiation. For example, someone might trade fi  ve sacks of rice for one cow, or four chickens for a sheep.
» The key problem with a barter system is the need for a double coincidence of 
wants — that is, the person with chickens must fi  nd a trader who wants four chickens in exchange for a sheep. As two people engaged in a transaction must both want what the other person is offering, bartering is highly ineffi  cient. 
» A second problem with bartering is that of divisibility — half a sheep or two-
thirds of a chicken is not very useful for traders. 
» A third problem is that of portability — compare the portability of a sheep or 
fi  sh with that of paper money (banknotes).
Hence, due to the problems associated with bartering, countries around the world eventually developed the use of commodity money, such as cowry shells, grain and cloth. For much of history, precious metals such as gold and silver have served a monetary role.
▲ This print shows Scandinavian and Russian traders bartering their wares
Deﬁ  nition
Bartering is the act 
of swapping items in exchange for other items through a process of bargaining and negotiation, due to the absence of money in the economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   89 24/01/18   11:22 AM16	 Money	and	banking
90
Activity
Bartering still takes place in some parts of the world today. Discuss with a partner the 
problems associated with bartering as a means of trade and exchange in your country.
Activity
Bartering still takes place in some parts of the world today. Discuss with a partner the 
problems associated with bartering as a means of trade and exchange in your country.
Exam-style questions
a Defi  ne the term ‘bartering’. [2]
b With reference to the functions of money, analyse why bartering is an 
ineffective method for trading. [6]
The functions of central banks
The central bank of a country is the monetary authority that oversees and manages the nation’s money supply and banking system. Examples of central banks include the European Central Bank (for the Eurozone countries), the USA’s Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the People’s Bank of China and the Reserve Bank of India. These banks are responsible for overseeing the monetary policies (see Chapter 27) of their respective countries, including being responsible for the nation’s entire money supply and the manipulation of interest rates to affect the economy.
Case study: The Federal Reserve
The Federal Reserve (also known informally as the ‘Fed’) is the central bank of the USA. 
It was formed in December 1913, mainly in response to fi  nancial crises around that time. The shareholders of the Federal Reserve are mainly the major banks in the USA, although the exact shareholdings are not made public. According to its educational website:
• The dollar was offi  cially used as the USA’s unit of currency in 1785, although the fi  rst 
dollar coin was issued in 1782.
• The Federal Reserve produces approximately 26 million banknotes each day, with a 
face value of around $907 million.
• Over 90 per cent of currency used in the USA comprises Federal Reserve banknotes.
• The Secret Service was created during the USA’s Civil War to fi  ght against counterfeit 
money.
• It costs the US government only about 6.4 cents to produce each banknote.• The average lifespan of a Federal Reserve $1 bill is just 21 months, whereas the 
lifespan of a $100 banknote averages 7.5 years.
Source: adapted from www.federalreserveeducation.org
Activity
What interesting facts and fi  gures can you fi  nd out about the central bank in your country?
Activity
What interesting facts and fi  gures can you fi  nd out about the central bank in your 
country?
Deﬁ  nition
The central bank of a 
country is the monetary authority that oversees and manages the economy’s money supply and banking system.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   90 24/01/18   11:22 AMThe functions of central banks
91Central banks tend to have the following four key functions:
» The sole issuer of banknotes and coins — in almost every country, the 
central bank has the sole rights to issue legal tender in its own country — that is, it is the only authority that can print banknotes and mint coins. This helps to bring uniformity to and improves public confidence in the country’s monetary system. One rare exception to this function is Hong Kong, where three commercial banks (Standard Chartered, HSBC and Bank of China) have note-issuing rights, although the Hong Kong Monetary Authority maintains overall control of the banking system, including the circulation of banknotes and coins.
» The government’s bank — the central bank operates as a banker to the government, performing the same functions as a commercial bank does for its customers. Hence, as the government’s bank, it maintains the bank accounts of the central government such as receiving deposits from government, making short-term loans to the government and making payments for items of government expenditure (see Chapter 26). The central bank also manages public sector debt and represents the government in international financial markets such as foreign exchange. This has become an important function of central banks because such intervention can help to stabilise the external value of a nation’s currency (see Chapter 38).
» The bankers’ bank — the central bank acts as the bank for other banks in the country. This function includes overseeing the cash reserves of commercial banks. This means that all banks in the country must have their accounts with the central bank, enabling the central monetary authority easily to manage the claims made by banks against each other. For example, payment made by a Citibank customer writing a cheque to another customer with an HSBC account goes through the central bank’s clearing system — that is, the central bank debits the account of the Citibank customer and credits the account of the HSBC customer. This function of the central bank reduces the need for cash withdrawals, thus enabling commercial banks to function more efficiently. In addition, it also allows the central bank to have a better overview of the liquidity position (the ability to convert assets into cash) of the country’s commercial banks. 
» The lender of last resort — given that the authorities require all commercial banks to keep a certain percentage of their cash balances as deposits with the central bank, these cash reserves can be used by the country’s banking system during financial emergencies. This function helps to build public confidence in the country’s banking system. For example, if a certain commercial bank faces temporary financial difficulties, it can, as a last resort, seek financial assistance from the central bank. This helps to ensure the commercial bank does not collapse, protects jobs and safeguards the nation’s banking system and economic welfare.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   91 24/01/18   11:22 AM16	 Money	and	banking
92Case study: Bank bailouts
A bailout refers to a loan or fi  nancial assistance provided to a 
company (or country) which faces major fi  nancial diffi  culties 
or the threat of bankruptcy. The global fi  nancial crises of 1997 and 2008 caused the collapse of hundreds of banks all over the world, over a number of years. The fi  nancial bailout by central banks was seen as a necessity to prevent job losses and socioeconomic failures on a mass scale. Central banks can do this through various means, such 
as providing subsidies or low-interest loans to commercial banks in need of liquidity (cash assets). Bailouts in Indonesia (1997) and Cyprus (2012) proved to be the most expensive in economic history, with the latter country spending $10 billion bailing out its banks — this represents a huge 56 per cent of Cyprus’s $18 billion GDP (see Figure 16.1).
Indonesia, 1997Cyprus, 2012Thailand, 1997Chile, 1981Ireland, 2008
Macedonia, 1993Korea, 1997 Turkey, 2000Jamaica, 1996 Iceland, 2008Argentina, 19800102030
57 56 55 44 44 43 41 32 32 31 44405060% of GDP
▲ Figure 16.1 The biggest bank bailouts as a percentage of GDP
Activities
1 Discuss as a group the reasons for and against central banks bailing out commercial 
banks facing a fi  nancial emergency.
2 Produce A3 coloured posters of the arguments for and against fi  nancial bailouts and 
use these as classroom displays.
Activities
1
 Discuss as a group the reasons for and against central banks bailing out commercial 
banks facing a fi  nancial emergency.
Commercial banks
A commercial bank is a retail bank that provides fi  nancial services to its 
customers, such as accepting savings deposits and approving bank loans or mortgages. Examples of commercial banks are shown in Table 16.2. All commercial banks are responsible for maintaining the deposits of their account holders. Their transactions are socially and legally governed by the central bank. Commercial banking started over 200 years ago when goldsmiths (metal workers specialising in precious metals such as gold) operated as banks. Banking itself can be traced as far back as 2000 
BC when merchants in Assyria and Babylonia used grain loans 
to farmers and other traders. Modern-day commercial online banking (using the internet) did not start until 1995.
Deﬁ  nition
A commercial bank is a 
retail bank that provides fi  nancial services to its customers, e.g. savings, bank loans and mortgages.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   92 24/01/18   11:22 AMCommercial banks
93Table 16.1  The world’s largest commercial banks, 2017
Rank Bank Country
1 Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) China
2 China Construction Bank China
3 Agricultural Bank of China China
4 Bank of China China
5 Mitsubishi UF J Financial Group Japan
6 JP Morgan Chase & Co. USA
7 Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) UK8 BNP Paribas France
9 Bank of America USA
10 Wells Fargo & Co. USA
Source: www.relbanks.com
The functions of commercial banks
The functions of commercial banks can be split into two categories: primary and 
secondary.
The primary functions of commercial banks include the following:
» Accepting deposits — commercial banks accept deposits from their customers, including private individuals, businesses and governments. Examples are sight deposits (deposits payable on demand) and time deposits (deposits payable after a fixed time period, such as 6 months or a year). Time deposits tend to attract higher rates of interest than sight deposits for deposit holders. Businesses also deposit their cash in commercial banks for the convenience of their own financial operations, such as paying their suppliers and employees.
» Making advances — commercial banks provide advances (loans) to their customers. These advances include overdrafts (a banking service that allows approved customers to withdraw more money than they actually have in their account) and mortgages (long-term secured loans for the purchase of assets such as commercial and residential property).
» Credit creation — this describes the process by which banks increase the money supply in an economy by making money available to borrowers. Credit allows the borrower (or debtor) to gain purchasing power (money) by promising to pay the lender (or creditor) at a future time. Credit creation enables commercial banks to generate considerable additional purchasing power from their cash deposits. While central banks can print money, they do not create credit; this is done by commercial banks and is a key factor that distinguishes commercial banks from other financial institutions such as insurance companies and investment banks.
The secondary functions of commercial banks include the following:
» Collecting and clearing cheques on behalf of their clients.
» Offering additional financial services such as tax advice, foreign exchange dealings and the buying and selling of shares.
» Providing safety deposit boxes for customers to safeguard highly valued possessions, including jewellery and important documents such as wills.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   93 24/01/18   11:22 AM16	 Money 	and	banking
94» Providing money transfer facilities, such as transferring money to an overseas 
bank account or to pay various bills, such as telephone, electricity, gas and water bills.
» Offering credit card facilities for the convenience of customers (private individuals and commercial clients).
» Offering internet banking facilities, such as online bill payments, wired bank transfers between bank accounts, and the online purchase of shares and foreign currencies.
▲ Credit cards allow customers to buy now and pay later, so are widely used as a medium of 
exchange
Exam-style question
According to The Economist, China’s economy is expected to overtake that of the 
USA by as early as 2020. Multinational companies hoping to make the most of this opportunity have been investing in China via the Shanghai Stock Exchange. Commercial banks, such as ICBC and HSBC, also have an increasingly important role in the development of the Chinese economy. Nevertheless, the trading of the renminbi, China’s official currency, is still closely monitored by the People’s Bank of China — the central bank.
1
 Describe one function of a commercial bank such as ICBC or HSBC.  [2]
2 Explain two key functions of central banks such as the People’s  
Bank of China.  [4]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   94 24/01/18   11:22 AMCommercial banks
95Exam-style questions
1 Which option is a characteristic of money?  [1]
A Medium of exchange
B PortabilityC Store of valueD Unit of account
2 Which term describes the act of swapping items in exchange for other 
items in the absence of money?  [1]
A BarteringB Double coincidence of wantsC NegotiationD Unit of account
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by money?
2 What are the various forms of money?3 What are the key functions of money?4 What are the main characteristics of money?5 What is a central bank?6 What are the key functions of a central bank?7 How does a central bank differ from commercial banks?8 What are the main functions of commercial banks?
Revision checklist
✔ Money is any commodity that can be used as a medium of exchange for 
the purchase of goods and services, such as banknotes and coins.
✔ Forms of money include: cash (notes and coins), commercial bank 
deposits and central bank reserves.
✔ There are four functions of money: a medium of exchange, a measure 
of value (unit of account), a store of value and a standard for deferred 
payment.
✔ Characteristics of money include: durability, acceptability, divisibility, 
uniformity, scarcity and portability.
✔ In the absence of money, the economy resorts to a system of bartering, 
although this requires a double coincidence of wants in order to function.
✔ The central bank of a country is the monetary authority that oversees and 
manages the economy’s money supply and the banking system.
✔ Central banks have four key functions: the sole issuer of legal tender, 
the government’s bank, the bankers’ bank and the lender of last resort.
✔ Commercial banks are retail banks that provide ﬁ  nancial services to 
their customers, such as savings accounts, bank loans and mortgages.
✔ Functions of commercial banks include: accepting deposits, making 
(approving) advances, credit creation and a range of other banking services (such as cheque clearance, foreign exchange dealings, money transfer facilities and online banking).
medium of exchange for 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   95 24/01/18   11:22 AM96
 17  Households
Infl  uences on household spending
Income
The amount of money that individuals spend on goods and services is largely 
dependent upon their level of income. The main source of income for most people is wages or salaries (see Chapter 18). However, people can earn income from other sources, including:
» interest on savings (return on capital)
» rent earned from leasing property (return on land)
» dividends — a share of a company’s profi  ts — from shares owned in a company 
(return on enterprise)
» profi  t earned from running a business (return on enterprise).
However, households are not able to spend all of the income they earn; they can only spend their disposable income. Disposable income refers to the income earned by an individual after income tax and other charges such as pension contributions have been deducted. It is therefore the amount of income a person has available to spend on goods and services. This is the single largest determinant of how much an individual or household spends, saves or borrows.
There is a positive relationship between the level of spending and the income 
earned — that is, higher levels of disposable income usually lead to higher spending and higher savings. Direct taxation (see Chapter 26) reduces the amount of income a person receives, so higher income tax rates can lower the level of disposable income and therefore consumption.
▲ There is a positive relationship between the level of spending and the income earned
Deﬁ  nition
Disposable income is the 
amount of income a person has available to spend on goods and services after compulsory deductions such as income tax.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand the factors that inﬂ  uence household spending, savings and 
borrowing.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   96 24/01/18   11:22 AMInfluences on household spending
97Different income levels affect different types of expenditure. For example, low 
income earners will spend a greater proportion of their income on food and necessities whereas high income earners will spend a lower proportion of their income on food and necessities. Table 17.1 shows the reasons why different income groups have different expenditure patterns (spending, saving and borrowing).
Table 17.1 Reasons for different expenditure patterns
Income 
groupSpending Saving Borrowing
Low • Spend most of 
their income on necessities, e.g. food, clothing and housing• Tends to be low as 
there is not much income left over after spending on necessities• Borrow to fund their expenditure 
on capital items, e.g. furniture, cars and home appliances
• In extreme circumstances, people 
may borrow to fund current expenditure of necessities
• Banks less likely to lend money 
to low income earners as they represent higher risk
Middle • Spend a lower 
proportion of their income on food and other necessities
• Spending on some 
luxuries• Able to save some 
money from their wages or salaries• Borrow money to fund 
expenditure on capital items, e.g. furniture, new cars and home appliances
• Use credit cards to pay for both 
capital and current expenditure
• Take out a mortgage (long-term 
secured loan) to purchase a home
High • Spend the smallest 
proportion of income on necessities
• Purchase luxury 
goods and services• High level of 
savings possible
• Save a greater 
proportion of their income• Borrowing occurs but there is 
only a small risk of not being able to repay loans for capital expenditure and mortgages
• Generally, there is less of a need 
to borrow money to fund items of capital expenditure
Figure 17.1 shows the proportion of income spent by a typical household in Canada.
Housing 35%Transportation
15–20%
Medical 3%
Clothing 3–5%Utilities
5%Savings
5–10%
Personal and
discretionary
5–10%Debt
payments
5–15%Food
10–20%
Source: www.nomoredebts.org/budgeting-guidelines 
▲ Figure 17.1 What Canadians spend their money on (2017)
Deﬁ  nitions
Current expenditure is money spent on goods and services consumed within the current year. Unlike capital expenditure, it is often recurrent, such as the spending on food, clothing, entertainment and haircuts.Capital expenditure is money spent by on fi  xed assets (items owned by an individual or fi  rm which last more than 12 months), such as computers, cars, furniture, buildings and equipment.
Study tip
It is possible for an 
individual simultaneously to spend more, save more and borrow more. For example, a middle-income earner may enjoy a signifi  cant pay rise, enabling her to spend more and to save more. She might also take out a loan to purchase a new car or a mortgage to buy a residential apartment.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   97 24/01/18   11:22 AM17	 HouseHolds
98
Activity
Identify all your own sources of income and list the factors that infl  uence how much of 
your income you spend in a typical week.
Activity
Identify all your own sources of income and list the factors that infl  uence how much of 
your income you spend in a typical week.
Activities
1 With reference to Figures 17.2–17.4, compare the trends in real household 
disposable income and consumer spending in the United States, Japan and the United Kingdom from 2007 to 2017. 
2 Determine whether there is a positive relationship (trend) between the two variables.
Activities
1
 With reference to Figures 17.2–17.4, compare the trends in real household 
disposable income and consumer spending in the United States, Japan and the 
2008 2010 2012 2014 20169,50012,000
11,50011,00010,50010,000Consumer spending ($bn)
10,00015,000
14,00013,00012,00011,000
Disposable income ($bn)Key
Consumer spending
Disposable personal income
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 17.2 Consumer spending and real disposable income in the USA, 2007–17
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016275,000310,000
305,000
300,000
295,000
290,000
285,000
280,000Consumer spending (¥ bn)
2001,000
800600400
Disposbale income (¥ 000s)Key
Consumer spending
Disposable personal income
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 17.3 Consumer spending and real disposable income in Japan, 2007–17
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   98 24/01/18   11:22 AMInfluences on household spending
992008 2010 2012 2014 2016270,000320,000
310,000300,000290,000280,000Consumer spending (£m)
275,000315,000
300,000305,000310,000
295,000
285,000
280,000
Disposable income (£m)290,000Key
Consumer spending
Households’ disposable income
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 17.4 Consumer spending and real disposable income in the UK, 2007–17
The wealth of an individual is measured by the amount of assets they own minus 
their liabilities (the amount they owe). When the value of assets, such as property 
and other investments, increases there is said to be a positive wealth effect. This causes people to spend more. In some cases, it also causes owners of assets to borrow against the value of their existing assets, such as residential or commercial property. 
Conspicuous consumption occurs when people purchase goods and services 
that they feel increase their status or image. For example, a person may buy a very expensive car, yacht, diamond ring or designer handbag as a status symbol. Wealthy people tend to engage in conspicuous consumption. 
By contrast, if the value of an asset decreases, the wealth effect can become 
negative. For example, a severe recession can cause some people to experience negative equity — when the value of their secured loan or mortgage exceeds the market value of their property.
▲ The Chinese are known for their love of luxury brands like Louis Vuitton, Gucci and Burberry. 
Conspicuous consumption in China shows no sign of a slowdownStudy tip
How to describe a trend:
1 Describe the overall 
trend from the beginning period to the end period.
2
 Describe any variations to the trend.
3
 Describe the magnitude (size) of any variations to the trend.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   99 24/01/18   11:22 AM17	 HouseHolds
100Case study: Negative equity
Yoshie Sano bought an apartment in Los Angeles for $1,000,000 in 2007. She borrowed 
$800,000 from the bank and paid a deposit of $200,000. In December 2008 the property market crashed due to the global fi  nancial crisis, causing Yoshie’s apartment to fall in value to $700,000. She is in negative equity as the value of the existing mortgage is greater than the value of the property.
Activity
With reference to the case study on negative equity, discuss in pairs:
a the impact of negative equity on Yoshie’s spending, saving and borrowing
b the options available to Yoshie to repay her mortgage.
Activity
With reference to the case study on negative equity, discuss in pairs:
We will now consider some of the other determinants of the level of spending, 
saving and borrowing, besides income.
Interest rates 
Interest rates determine the cost of borrowing or lending money. An increase in interest rates (see Chapter 27) may lead to decreased consumer spending, less borrowing and more saving because:
» borrowing becomes more expensive and therefore the demand for loans falls, 
which leads to less consumer spending
» savings may become more attractive due to the higher return, so individuals 
may save more and spend less
» if an individual has an existing loan or mortgage, the increase in interest 
repayments is likely to cause a fall in disposable incomes, so spending falls.
Repayments on
existing loansRepayments on
existing loans
Interest
ratesCost of
borrowing
Cost of
borrowingDemand
for loans
Demand
for loans Consumer
spendingDecrease
Increase
DecreaseIncrease
IncreaseDecrease
▲ Figure 17.5 The effects of a change in interest rates on consumer spending
Confi  dence levels
The level of spending in an economy is heavily infl  uenced by the level of consumer and business confi  dence in an economy. During a recession or a period of low economic growth (see Chapter 29), people may prefer to save rather than spend as they lack confi  dence about the future of the economy, such as fearing that they may lose their job. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   100 24/01/18   11:22 AMInfluences on household spending
101By contrast, during an economic boom or a period of high economic growth, 
people and fi  rms feel confi  dent about the future and therefore purchase more 
goods and services. The sale of luxury items such as restaurant meals, spa treatments and foreign holidays increases. Firms may invest more in new equipment and technology because they feel confi  dent about the future. This creates jobs and fuels spending, borrowing and saving.
▲ The sale of luxury items such as bespoke jewellery increases during an economic boom or 
period of high economic growth
Infl  ation 
The general level of prices in the economy infl  uences consumer spending because 
an increase in infl  ation (see Chapter 31) reduces the purchasing power of individuals. Therefore, infl  ation tends to cause reduced spending, less saving and more borrowing, and vice versa.
Age
A person’s age impacts upon their level of consumer spending. A young single person may earn a relatively low income and may spend most of it on goods and services to support their lifestyle. As a person gets older their earnings will typically rise and they may start to save a greater proportion of their income to buy a property or in anticipation of marriage and children. During the family stage of a person’s life, they will spend more of their income on their children but might also have to save for their children’s university education and to build up a pension to support themselves when they retire. After retirement, people dissave (the opposite of saving) as they have no earned income, so must spend from their savings.
101
Activity 
Copy and complete the following table using the words: high, low or moderate.
Age Spending Saving Borrowing Dissaving
16–25 High Low Low –
26–35 Moderate
35–45 Moderate45–65 Moderate65 onwards Yes
Activity 
Copy and complete the following table using the words: high, low or moderate.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   101 24/01/18   11:22 AM17	 HouseHolds
102The size of households 
The average size of households has changed over time. In economically developed 
countries, birth rates are falling (see Chapter 34) as people choose to marry later in life and have fewer children. There has also been an increase in single households. This infl  uences expenditure patterns because, for example, a family with three children will usually consume more goods and services than a single-person household.
Exam-style question
The chart below shows the amount spent on goods and services in a week in the United Kingdom in 2016.
20 10 0 30 40 50 60 70 80 90Education
£ per weekTransport
Housing (net),
fuel and power
Recreation and culture
Food and 
non-alcoholic drinks
Restaurants and hotels
Miscellaneous
goods and services
Household goods
and services
Clothing and footwear
HealthCommunication
Alcoholic drinks,
tobacco and narcotics
Source: Offi  ce for National Statistics
▲ Family spending in the UK, fi  nancial year ending March 2016
a With reference to the chart, describe how spending patterns in the UK might 
be different from those in less economically developed countries such as Haiti or Bangladesh. [2]
b Spending on education and health is a small proportion of overall spending in 
the UK. Explain two reasons why this might be the case. [4]
Infl  uences on household savings
Saving occurs when a person puts away part of their current income for future spending. The reasons for saving include the following:
» A person decides to sacrifi  ce current spending so that they have funds to spend 
in the future. For example, people save for a holiday or for their retirement. Parents may save money for their children’s education.
Deﬁ  nition
Saving occurs when a 
person puts away part of their current income for future spending.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   102 24/01/18   11:22 AMInfluences on household savings
103» A person may choose to save a portion of their income in a bank or other 
fi  nancial institution in order to earn interest. Banks also provide a secure place 
for depositing savings.
» A person may save for precautionary reasons so that they have money put aside 
in case of an emergency such as an accident, job loss or unforeseen event in the future.
The level of savings is affected by the following factors:
» Age of a person — in many modern economies, from about the age of 25 people start to save for their future. They will be likely to have secured permanent employment and paid off any student loans. The amount a person will save is infl  uenced by the amount of support a government gives its citizens in terms of old-age pensions and healthcare provision. If people have to fund their own healthcare and pensions, they will have to save more during their working lives.
» Attitude to saving — as every person is different, they each have a different attitude to saving. For example, in the USA and the UK, many consumers borrow to fund expenditure by using credit cards to make purchases or by getting loans to buy expensive items such as cars and home appliances. In other countries such as Japan and Germany, the use of credit cards is relatively low. The Chinese are generally cautious and conservative with money, so like to save for a ‘rainy day’ (unforeseen emergencies).
» Consumer and business confi  dence — if people and fi  rms have confi  dence in the economy, the level of savings will usually fall as people spend money more willingly. Savings tend to rise during an economic slowdown when consumers are feeling less optimistic about the future.
» Interest rates — a rise in interest rates means that people with existing debts have higher repayments to make to the lender. This will therefore reduce their level of spending in other areas. At the same time, people may save more in a bank to take advantage of the higher rate of return. By contrast, when interest rates are low, people have a disincentive to save and may choose to spend their money instead or fi  nd an alternative means of increasing the value of their savings, such as by purchasing shares in a fi  rm.
» Income levels — in general, the more money a person earns, the higher their savings tend to be. This is because a wealthy individual is more able to save a higher proportion of each extra dollar earned. By contrast, less-wealthy people are unable to reach their target wealth, so are less able to save money.
Case study: Savings in China
In China, the level of gross savings as a proportion of GDP is close to 50 per cent. 
Possible reasons for China’s high level of savings are as follows:
» Household incomes have risen due to China’s phenomenal economic growth over 
recent decades. The average household has seen a doubling of its income over a 
7-year period. Many people have a surplus of income over their expenditure, so are able to save more.
» The one-child policy, which was in place from 1979 until 2015, reduced family size 
and therefore the level of household spending (and hence encouraged higher levels of saving).
» People are accustomed to saving to buy large items they wish to own instead of 
borrowing money from banks in order to do so. Culturally, Chinese people buy what they can afford, with cash, preferring not to get into debt to make purchases.
▲ There are numerous 
reasons why people save money
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   103 24/01/18   11:22 AM17	 HouseHolds
104Infl  uences on household borrowing
Borrowing occurs when an individual, fi  rm or the government takes out a loan 
from a bank or fi  nancial institution, paying it back over a period of time with interest. Borrowing leads to debt, which is manageable if monthly repayments are affordable and interest rates are relatively low. An increase in interest rates causes repayments to rise and this can affect the purchasing power of individuals, fi  rms and governments.
Case study: The cost of borrowing
Laura Brown borrows $500,000 to buy a property when current mortgage interest rates 
are 6 per cent. In the fi  rst year, interest repayments are $30,000 (or $2500 per month). In the second year of the mortgage, interest rates increase to 7 per cent and interest repayments rise to $35,000 (which increases Laura Brown’s monthly loan repayments to around $2917). The higher cost of borrowing will therefore reduce her disposable income.
Activity 
Discuss with a partner the costs and benefi  ts of borrowing money to mortgage a home.
Activity 
Discuss with a partner the costs and benefi  ts of borrowing money to mortgage a home.
Individuals and fi  rms may borrow for different reasons, including:
» to fund expensive items such as a car or an overseas holiday
» to fund private and tertiary education
» to purchase property or land, such as a factory, offi  ce or home
» to start up a new business
» to fund large projects, such as business expansion in a foreign country.
Deﬁ  nition
Borrowing occurs when 
an individual, fi  rm or the government takes out a loan, paying it back to the fi  nancial lender over a period of time, with interest payments.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   104 24/01/18   11:22 AMInfluences on household borrowing
105
▲ Many students borrow money to fund their university education
Factors that affect the level of borrowing in an economy include the following:
» Interest rates — the higher the level of interest, the more expensive 
borrowing is. Hence, there is a negative correlation between the level of interest rates and the amount of borrowing in the economy.
» Confidence levels — firms and individuals will tend to borrow more if confidence in the economy is high. For example, firms will borrow to invest in long-term capital projects if they believe economic prospects are good. 
» Availability of funds — banks and other financial institutions lend money to individuals and firms in the form of loans and mortgages. The central bank of a country (see Chapter 16) controls the amount of funds which are available for borrowing by setting the cash reserve ratio (the percentage of a bank’s assets which must be kept in cash in bank vaults or with the central bank). A decrease in the cash reserve ratio means that more funds are available for lending, resulting in an increase in the money supply and more money being available for borrowing.
» Credit cards — credit allows individuals and firms to purchase goods and services with deferred payment. People or firms take ownership of the goods and services immediately and must repay the amount to the credit card company several weeks later — they ‘buy now and pay later’. If the full amount 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   105 24/01/18   11:22 AM17	 House Holds
106owed to the credit card company is repaid in full each month, then no interest 
is charged, but if only a portion is repaid then interest is charged on the remainder. Interest rate charges on credit card borrowing are extremely high, typically as high as 36 per cent.
» Store cards — these are issued to regular customers of large retail stores in many countries to encourage spending. Store cards act as a credit card that can be used only in the individual retail outlet. Firms offer discounts and free gifts as an incentive for people to sign up for a store card. Customers can also accumulate loyalty points on the card, which can be used in the future to purchase goods and services within the store. Store cards can give people an incentive to overspend and can raise their level of debt. If debts are cleared when payment is requested, no interest is charged, but just as in the case of credit cards, if repayments are not made then interest is charged on the outstanding debt.
» Wealth — the wealth of a person may affect their level of borrowing as a bank will be more willing to lend money to wealthier individuals or highly profitable firms. This is because they have valuable assets and so are more likely to repay the loan, whereas less wealthy customers have a higher risk of defaulting on the loan (being unable to repay their borrowing). To avoid bad debts (debts which cannot be repaid), banks often make sure that they have some guarantee of getting their money back. A large business may own several stores or have valuable assets which can be used as collateral (security) for a loan. In the case of a mortgage, the property purchased provides security for the loan, and therefore if the borrower defaults on the loan, the bank will take ownership of the property.
Exam-style questions
The ‘household debt to disposable income’ ratio in South Korea is one of the highest in the world. The reasons for the high levels of debt are first that, in the early 2000s, the South Korean government lent money to small firms to encourage their growth and development, and second there was a housing boom in 2011. The acceleration in house prices provided an incentive for people to increase their borrowing to buy property as they believed that prices would continue to rise.
There is a low savings ratio in South Korea, which means that banks have a 
limited amount of funds to lend to borrowers. As a result, they have borrowed from overseas. Households are worried about their level of debt, despite the recent growth in real disposable income.
a
 Identify two reasons why borrowing might have increased in  
South Korea.  [2]
b Explain two problems that may arise because of a low savings ratio in  South Korea.
 [4]
c Analyse the effect on the economy of a high ratio of borrowing to  disposable income.
 [6]
d Discuss reasons why some people spend more of their income and  others save more of their income.
 [8]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   106 24/01/18   11:22 AMInfluences on household borrowing
107Chapter review questions
1 What are the main factors that affect the level of consumer spending in an economy?
2 How will the spending, borrowing and saving patterns of a young family with two 
children under the age of 5 compare with those of an old-aged pensioner?
3 How do spending and saving patterns of low income earners differ from those of high 
income earners?
4 How does wealth affect a person’s level of spending, saving and borrowing?5 How do changes in interest rates infl  uence consumer spending, saving and 
borrowing?
6 What are the main determinants of the level of savings in an economy?7 What factors affect the level of borrowing in an economy?8 Why might one person save more of their income than another?
Revision checklist
✔ The amount of money that individuals spend on goods and services is 
largely dependent upon their level of disposable income.
✔ Disposable income is the amount of income a person has available 
to spend on goods and services after compulsory deductions such as 
income tax.
✔ Direct taxation reduces the amount of disposable income and therefore 
the amount of spending and saving in the economy.
✔ Current expenditure is money spent on goods and services consumed 
within the current year . Capital expenditure is money spent on ﬁ  xed assets.
✔ The wealth of an individual is measured by the amount of assets they 
own minus their liabilities (the amount they owe). A positive wealth effect causes people to spend more.
✔ Apart from levels of income, other determinants of the level of spending 
include: interest rates, conﬁ  dence levels, inﬂ  ation, age and the size of households.
✔ Saving occurs when a person puts away part of their current income for 
future spending.
✔ Determinants of saving include: the level of disposable income, age, 
attitudes towards saving, conﬁ  dence levels and interest rates.
✔ Borrowing occurs when an individual, ﬁ  rm or the government takes out 
a loan, paying it back to the ﬁ  nancial lender over a period of time, with interest payments.
✔ Factors that affect the level of borrowing in an economy include: the level 
of disposable income, interest rates, conﬁ  dence levels, the availability of funds (money supply), credit (including store cards) and wealth.
 The amount of money that individuals spend on goods and services is 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   107 24/01/18   11:22 AM108
 18  Workers
Factors affecting an individual’s choice 
of occupation
An individual’s choice of occupation depends on many factors, which can be 
categorised as wage- and non-wage factors.
Wage factors refer to the fi  nancial rewards that workers receive in return for 
their labour services. These are a major infl  uence on their choice of occupation. Table 18.1 outlines the different types of payment a worker may receive in return for their labour.
Table 18.1 Financial payment methods for labour services
Methods of payment Explanation Examples
Wages Wages are time-based, paid 
hourly, daily or weekly, so are a variable cost to fi  rmsPart-time workers in a shop or restaurant receiving $7 per hour
Salary Salaries are paid monthly at a fi  xed rate irrespective of the amount of work done, so are fi  xed costsFull-time workers, such as teachers, accountants, shop managers and nurses
Piece rate A fi  xed amount paid per item produced or soldWorkers producing individual items in a factory receiving $2 per garment made
Commission A percentage of the value of 
products or services soldReal estate agents receiving 1% of the value of each property they sell
Bonus An additional lump sum of money paid during the year, usually dependent upon performanceBank managers earning end-of-year bonuses based on the bank’s profi  ts
Profi  t-related pay Additional payment to workers, 
based on the amount of profi  ts made by a fi  rmA partner in a law fi  rm receiving 15% of the annual profi  ts
Share options Workers receive shares in the fi  rm 
to give them an incentive to work hard, so that the fi  rm is profi  tablePublic limited companies offering share options to employees
Fringe benefi  ts (or perks)Additional benefi  ts, which have a monetary valuePensions, health insurance, company car, laptop, mobile phone, education for children, or membership of a health clubBy the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand the wage and non-wage factors affecting an individual’s 
choice of occupation
★ understand the factors that determine wages
★ discuss the reasons for differences in earnings
★ understand the advantages and disadvantages of specialisation for 
workers, ﬁ  rms and the economy. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   108 24/01/18   11:22 AMFactors affecting an individual’s choice of occupation
109Non-wage factors are also a major infl  uence on an individual’s choice of 
occupation. While a person may be motivated by money in the short term, he or she will also want to feel happy and motivated at work in the long term. Non-wage factors that infl  uence an individual’s choice of occupation include the following:
» Level of challenge — does the job require thinking skills or is it repetitive and boring?
» Career prospects — are there opportunities for progression within the fi  rm, or will a person have to change jobs to be promoted?
» Level of danger involved — is the job dangerous? For example, some people face a high degree of risk at work, such as lifeboat rescue teams, fi  refi  ghters, window cleaners and scaffold erectors.
» Length of training required — some jobs require few skills, such as cleaning 
or shop work. By contrast, other jobs require many years of training, such as civil engineers, plastic surgeons, pilots, accountants and lawyers. 
» Level of education required — some jobs require no or minimal education 
whereas other jobs require post-graduate levels of education (for example, university professors, architects and dentists).
» Recognition in the job — does the worker receive praise and recognition for 
their performance at work? If a worker feels respected at work, then they may be motivated to work harder and remain in the job.
» Personal satisfaction gained from the job — if a worker feels satisfi  ed and 
happy in their work, they may work harder and stay in the job longer. For example, voluntary employment might be carried out by people who are happy to work for no pay, as the intrinsic reward they get is the personal satisfaction of working for a charity, such as taking care of the elderly, sick or those in need.
» Level of experience required — some jobs require no or minimal experience 
whereas other jobs, such as judges and law makers, require a minimum amount of experience.
Case study: Fringe benefits
• Yahoo! employees get discounts to ski resorts and amusement parks.
• Visa rewards workers who use public transportation to get to work.• Southwest Airlines employees get free fl  ights for themselves, their family and 
friends.
• Mattel allows its employees to take paid time off to attend their children’s school fi  eld 
trips.
• Google offers free food, staff gym, bowling alley and library.• Campbell Soup Company has on-site kindergarten and after-school programmes for 
staff with young children.
Activity
Interview several adults and ask them the fi  nancial and non-fi  nancial reasons why they chose their occupation. Share your fi  ndings with the rest of the class. 
Activity
Interview several adults and ask them the fi  nancial and non-fi  nancial reasons why they 
chose their occupation. Share your fi  ndings with the rest of the class. 
▲ Workers putting up bamboo 
scaffolding in Hong Kong
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   109 24/01/18   11:22 AM18	 Workers
110Wage determination
Wages are determined by the interaction of the demand for labour and the 
supply of labour. For example, the combination of high demand (ability and willingness to pay) for neurosurgeons and their low supply means their pay is very high.
The demand for labour
The demand for labour refers to the number of workers that fi  rms are willing 
and able to employ at a given wage rate. As with all factors of production, the demand for labour is a derived demand. This means that labour is demanded for the goods and services it produces, and not for itself. For example, bakers are demanded for the bread they bake, rather than for the sake of hiring bakers. 
Wage rate per
hour ($) 
Number of workers
demandedOW1
W2
N1N2DL
▲ Figure 18.1 The demand for labour curve
Figure 18.1 shows a downward-sloping demand for labour (D L) curve. When the 
wage rate falls from W 1 to W 2, the number of workers demanded increases from 
N1 to N 2. This is because fi  rms (employers) are able to hire more workers when 
the wage rate is lower.
The factors that infl  uence the demand for labour include the following:
» The level of total demand in the economy — during a boom or period of 
economic growth, the demand for goods and services, and therefore the demand for labour to produce them, will be higher. By contrast, the demand for labour falls during a recession or period of declining growth.
» The productivity of labour (output per worker over a period of time) — the 
demand for workers increases as their productivity increases through training and changes to production methods. For example, allowing workers to make suggestions about how their working practices can be improved and putting the suggestions into practice can motivate workers as they feel empowered to make changes. Recognition of workers’ achievements can also be motivational and increase productivity. Consider how praise from your teachers or parents can impact upon your own attitude to learning!
» The cost of labour as compared with the cost of machinery and technology 
that could replace the labour — technology and machinery can often perform the tasks carried out by workers. Although technology and machinery are expensive to purchase in the short run, they can save money for the business Study tip
When you are answering 
questions about the demand for and supply of labour, remember that workers supply labour services to fi  rms, and fi  rms demand workers to produce goods and services.
Deﬁ  nitions
The demand for labour is the number of workers that fi  rms are willing and able to hire at a given wage rate.Derived demand means that labour (or any other factor of production) is not demanded for itself but for the goods and services it is used to produce.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   110 24/01/18   11:22 AMWage determination
111in the long run. For example, many fi  rms have cut back on the number of 
security guards they hire, replacing them with security cameras. Cameras are cheaper in the long run and they do not need toilet or meal breaks, although they do break down occasionally! Similarly, car manufacturers use robotic equipment and machinery that can operate 24 hours a day.
▲ Security cameras can be more cost-effective than security guards in the long run
The supply of labour
The supply of labour in an economy consists of people who are of working age and who are both willing and able to work at different wage rates. This does not include those who are in full-time education or those who do not work by choice, such as a housewife or househusband.
W2
W1
Number of workers
suppliedN2SL
N1OWage rate per
hour ($) 
▲ Figure 18.2 The supply of labour curve
Figure 18.2 shows an upward-sloping supply of labour (S L) curve. If the wage 
rate in an industry increases from W 1 to W 2, the number of people willing to work 
will increase from N 1 to N 2 because more workers are attracted by higher wages.
Deﬁ  nition
The supply of labour refers 
to everyone in an economy who is of working age and is both willing and able to work at different wage rates.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   111 24/01/18   11:22 AM18	 Workers
112It is possible, at least in theory, for the S L curve to be backward bending. 
Figure 18.3 shows that high wages rates will cause workers to work longer hours 
to increase their earnings, but only up to a certain point. As wage rates increase from W
1 to W 2 the number of hours worked increases from H 1 to H 2. However, as 
wages increase from W 2 to W 3 the number of hours worked falls from H 2 to H 3 
because there is a trade-off between work and leisure time. At W 3 a person can 
work fewer hours yet have a higher income than at W 2. The backward-bending 
supply of labour curve therefore occurs when wage rates rise to a high enough point to allow people to work less and enjoy more leisure hours.
W2W3
W1
Number of hours
workedH2SL
H1H3OWage rate per
hour ($) 
▲ Figure 18.3 The backward-bending supply of labour curve
The structure of the labour supply varies between countries and depends on the following factors.
Labour force participation rate 
The labour force participation rate is the percentage of the working population that is working, rather than unemployed. Table 18.2 shows the participation rate in a selection of countries. This is influenced by:
» the number of full-time and part-time workers in the labour force
» the number of women in the workforce
» the age distribution of the workforce
» the official retirement age of the country.
Availability and level of welfare benefits 
In many countries, welfare benefits are paid to the unemployed. However, if welfare benefits are high and readily available, this can discourage people from seeking employment as the opportunity cost of not working and receiving welfare payments is too great. Governments try to regulate who can receive benefits to prevent disincentives to work. For example, in the UK an eligible person must prove that they are actively seeking work if they are to continue to receive welfare payments.
Changing social attitudes 
In many countries, more women are entering the workforce and delaying having families while more men are looking after the home and children. This affects the composition of the workforce. Also, as a result of falling birth rates some countries have ageing populations (see Chapter 34). This means such countries may have to rely on immigration to ensure that they have workers with the required skills in the future.Table 18.2 Labour 
participation rates (% of population aged 15+ in selected countries)
Country Labour 
participation rate (%)
United Arab Emirates79
Vietnam 78
Thailand 71Bangladesh 62Mauritius 60Japan 59Nigeria 56France 55Jordan 40
Source: adapted  
from the World Bank
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   112 24/01/18   11:22 AMWage determination
113Geographical mobility 
This refers to the willingness and ability of a person to relocate from one part of 
a country to another for work. There are two main reasons why some people may not be geographically mobile:
» Family ties and related commitments — people may not want to relocate as they want to be near their family and friends. There may be other commitments such as schooling arrangements for children (relocation can be highly disruptive to the education of children who have to move to a new school in a new town or country).
» Costs of living may vary between regions, being too high in another location and making it uneconomical for a person to relocate there. For example, a bus driver may fi  nd it impossible to relocate from the countryside to the city because house prices are much higher in urban areas and therefore they cannot afford to rent or purchase a home in the city. By contrast, a banker may be offered a relocation allowance to move to another city and the potential earnings are much higher, so the banker has greater geographical mobility than the bus driver.
Occupational mobility 
This refers to the extent to which a person is able to change between jobs. The degree of occupational mobility depends on the cost and length of training required to change professions. For example, an ex-banker might retrain to become an economics teacher in a relatively short time, but retraining to become a civil engineer or criminal lawyer might take them longer. The more skilled and qualifi  ed a person is, the greater their occupational mobility tends to be.
Exam-style questions
In some countries around the world there are shortages of people with particular skills. For example:
• There is a global shortage of doctors and nurses.
• Belgium and the UK have a shortage of chefs.  • Nordic countries have a shortage of psychologists.
Millions of international migrants are prepared to relocate in order to take 
advantage of employment opportunities. For example, many nurses trained in the Philippines seek employment opportunities in overseas countries.
a Give two reasons why there is a global shortage of doctors and nurses. [2]
b Explain the reasons why nurses trained in the Philippines may relocate to 
take advantage of employment opportunities. [4]
c Analyse how countries can attract individuals to professions in which they 
have a shortage of workers. [6]
Activity
Use the BBC Interactive Guide (http://goo.gl/YJjCK) to investigate global employment 
opportunities in selected countries around the world.
Activity
Use the BBC Interactive Guide (
opportunities in selected countries around the world.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   113 24/01/18   11:22 AM18	 Workers
114Equilibrium wage rate
For the vast majority of jobs in a market economy, wages are determined by the 
interaction of the demand for and supply of labour (see Figure 18.4).
We
Number of workers
employedSL
DL
NeOWage rate per
hour ($) 
▲ Figure 18.4 Equilibrium wage rate determination
The equilibrium wage rate is determined when the wage rate workers are willing to work for equals the wage rate that fi  rms (employers) are prepared to pay — that is, when the demand for labour is equal to the supply of labour. In Figure 18.4, the equilibrium wage rate is W
e and N e workers are employed. 
Changes in the demand for or supply of labour in an industry will therefore change the equilibrium wage rate.
Activity
In small groups, investigate the differences in earnings between different occupations in 
your country, or a country of your choice. Each group could research the differences in earnings based on:
• skilled versus unskilled
• male versus female• private sector versus public sector• primary versus secondary versus tertiary sectors of production.
Compare your fi  ndings with those of the other groups in your class.
Activity
In small groups, investigate the differences in earnings between different 
your country, or a country of your choice. Each group could research the differences in 
Relative bargaining power
The ability of workers to achieve higher wages depends partly on their ability to 
negotiate and bargain with their employers. This is affected by several factors:
» Trade unions — in general, trade unions (see Chapter 19) will use their 
bargaining strength to negotiate on behalf of their members. The more united the trade union and the larger its membership, the more successful it is likely to be in negotiating with employer representatives.
» Age and experience — earnings change over a person’s lifetime. Age has 
a direct impact on workers’ bargaining power in achieving higher wages. Inexperienced workers, such as graduates in their fi  rst year of work, will earn less than highly experienced workers. Workers can negotiate higher salaries and wages if they have a greater degree of experience. However, in general a person’s earnings potential declines after the age of 60.
» Level of education — a person’s level of education tends to affect their 
earnings and their ability to negotiate higher wages (see Table 18.3).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   114 24/01/18   11:22 AMWage determination
115Table 18.3 Weekly median earnings and unemployment rate by educational attainment in the USA, 2016
Less than college graduate College graduate
Less than high school 
graduateHigh school graduate Bachelor’s degree Master’s, 
professional, doctoral degree
Mean income, full-time workers$504 $692 $1156 $1380
Unemployment rate 7.4% 5.2% 2.7% 2.4%
Source: adapted from US Department of Labor 
Exam-style questions
a Give one reason why the potential earnings of an individual tend to fall after 
the age of 60. [2]
b With reference to Table 18.3, explain how educational attainment impacts upon earnings of an individual. [4]
Government policy: the minimum wage
Wage determination is also infl  uenced by government policy in the form of national minimum wage (NMW) legislation. This is the lowest amount a fi  rm can pay its workers as set by the government. Any fi  rm which pays workers less than the legal minimum wage is breaking the law. 
Since May 2017, the NMW in Hong Kong has been HK$34.5 (around $4.48) per 
hour for all workers. In Australia, the NMW is AU$17.70 (around $13.25) per hour. In some countries, such as the UK, the NMW is age-dependent (see Table 18.4).
Table 18.4 Minimum wage rates per hour in the UK, 2017
Age of worker NMW Approx. US$
Under 18 £4.05 $5.22
18–20 £5.60 $7.23
21–24 £7.05 $9.10
25 and over £7.50 $9.68
Source: www.minimum-wage.co.uk
Activities
1 Suggest reasons why the minimum wage in the UK is less for younger workers than 
for workers aged 25 and over. Discuss possible reasons why the NMW is lower in 
Hong Kong than in Australia. 
2 Find out the minimum wage in your country, or a country of your choice, and consider 
whether a job paying the NMW is suffi  cient to live on.
Activities
1
 Suggest reasons why the minimum wage in the UK is less for younger workers than 
for workers aged 25 and over. Discuss possible reasons why the NMW is lower in 
In Figure 18.5, the equilibrium wage rate before the national minimum wage is W 1 
and N 1 workers are demanded and supplied. If the government introduces an NMW 
which is above the equilibrium wage at W 2 then the quantity of labour supplied
Deﬁ  nition
A national minimum wage is 
the lowest legal amount any 
fi  rm can pay its workers and is set by the government.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   115 24/01/18   11:22 AM18	 Workers
116W2
W1
Number of workers
employedN1N2DLNMWSL
N3OWage rate per
hour ($) 
▲ Figure 18.5 National minimum wage
to the market increases from N 1 to N 2 as more workers are prepared to work for a 
higher wage rate.
However, the quantity of labour demanded falls from N 1 to N 3 because firms 
(employers) are less able or willing to pay as many workers at a higher wage rate. 
As the quantity of labour supplied is greater than the quantity demanded, there is a surplus of labour at a wage rate of W
2. Thus, if the NMW is set too high, this 
may lead to unemployment in the economy, at least in the short run.
Advantages of a national minimum wage include the following:
» Workers receive a fair (or ‘liveable’) wage for an hour’s work and are not 
exploited by employers.
» Unemployed people may have an incentive to work as the wage rate may be more attractive than relying on welfare payments.
» Low income earners may have more money to spend and this may increase consumption in the economy, thus easing any fears that higher wages (and hence costs of production) might cause unemployment.
Disadvantages of a minimum wage include the following:
» Workers who earn more than the minimum wage (perhaps due to their seniority at work) may request a higher wage rate to maintain the wage differential between them and workers who earn less than they do. For example, when cleaners in an office receive a pay rise as a result of an increase in the NMW, other office staff may ask for a wage increase to maintain the difference between their wages and those of the cleaners. This causes an even larger increase in the cost of labour for firms.
» As indicated in Figure 18.5, unemployment in the economy (see Chapter 30) may increase because firms face higher wage bills and reduce their demand for labour. Firms may purchase machinery and equipment to reduce the number of workers required. 
Reasons for differences in earnings
Various factors can influence differences in earnings between workers.
Differences between skilled and unskilled workers
In general, skilled workers earn more than unskilled workers due to their relatively high demand and low supply. Table 18.5 shows some of the highest- and lowest-paid occupations in the UK.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   116 24/01/18   11:22 AMReasons for differences in earnings
117Table 18.5 Earnings for selected occupations in the UK, April 2017
Profession Annual salary (£) Annual salary (£)
Chief executive officer 107,703 Bus and coach drivers 21,533
Aircraft pilots 90,146 School secretaries 16,366
Legal professionals 73,425 Cleaners 7,919
Medical practitioners 69,463 Waiters 7,554
Senior police officers 58,533 Bar staff 7,404
Note: all figures are expressed as pre-tax earnings for the median full-time worker
Source: adapted from Office for National Statistics
The data in Table 18.5 show that unskilled occupations (such as bar staff and 
waiters) earn far less on average than skilled workers (such as legal professionals and aircraft pilots). This is because there is a large supply of people able to work as waiters and bar staff (relatively low-skilled occupations), but to be a doctor, lawyer or pilot requires a university degree and subsequent professional training. Therefore, the supply of doctors is lower than that of waiters, as illustrated in Figure 18.6.
Wd2
Wd1Ww2
Ww1
Number of workers
employedd1DL1DL2SwaitersSdoctors
d2w1w2 OWage rate per
hour ($) 
▲ Figure 18.6 The difference in the equilibrium wage rates of waiters and doctors
Figure 18.6 shows the demand for and supply of waiters and doctors in an economy. Waiters are elastic in supply (S
waiters) because if the demand for 
waiters increases from D L1 to D L2, the percentage change in quantity of waiters 
supplied (w 1 to w 2) will be greater than the percentage increase in wages 
(Ww1 to W w2) as indicated by the red arrows. This is because the job requires 
few skills, so it will be relatively easy to increase the supply of waiters in the short term.
By contrast, doctors are inelastic in supply (S
doctors). If demand for doctors 
increases from D L1 to D L2, the percentage change in quantity of doctors supplied 
(d1 to d 2) in the short term will be less than the percentage increase in wages 
(Wd1 to W d2). This is because the level of qualifications and length of training 
required both make it difficult to increase the supply of doctors in the short term. A relatively large increase in wages is required to attract people to study and train as doctors, as illustrated by the blue arrows.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   117 24/01/18   11:22 AM18	 Workers
118
▲ Waiters are elastic in supply, whereas doctors are inelastic in supply
Differences between primary, secondary and tertiary 
sector workers
Workers in the primary sector industries of agriculture, fi  shing and forestry tend 
to earn the lowest wages in the economy, as much of their work is unskilled. In addition, the output of these industries, such as fi  sh and food products, has a low sales value. In general, as the value of a good or service produced increases, so will the wage of the person who produced it. A rise in the price of minerals and metals is likely to lead to higher earnings for people working in mining and quarrying. 
In the UK, electricians and gas technicians have been in short supply in recent 
years. The short supply and the necessary training period are likely to lead to higher earnings for workers in these trades.
Occupations in the fi  nance, insurance, information and communication 
industries typically earn the highest wages. These tertiary sector occupations produce services of a higher value than in the primary sector, and workers are rewarded accordingly.
People in tertiary sector professions tend to have high earnings because to 
become a fully qualifi  ed accountant, doctor or lawyer requires postgraduate-level study, professional examinations and many years of experience. The reward for this time and effort is higher wages, which attracts people to these professions. In many countries, students have to take out loans for university and postgraduate training, and they would only be prepared to do this because of the potential reward of high future earnings.
Activity
Discuss in small groups the possible reasons why people who produce food, which is 
essential for life, get paid one of the lowest wages on earth, while bankers, who produce nothing of real substance, get paid one of the highest.
Activity
Discuss in small groups the possible reasons why people who produce food, which is 
essential for life, get paid one of the lowest wages on earth, while bankers, who produce 
Differences between male and female workers
In literally all countries, there is a noticeable difference between 
the average wages of male and female workers (see Figure 18.7). Study tip
It would be incorrect 
to state that all people working in the tertiary sectors are paid more than those working in the secondary or primary sector industries. For example, a low-skilled employee working in a supermarket or fast-food restaurant will be paid less than a miner or well-qualifi  ed construction worker. For more about secondary sector workers, see Chapter 20.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   118 24/01/18   11:22 AMReasons for differences in earnings
119Possible reasons for the difference in male and female earnings are as  
follows:
16–170200400600800
18–21 22–29 30–39 40–49 50–59 60 and over£ per weekKey
Male (£)
Female (£)
▲ Figure 18.7 Median weekly earnings for UK full-time employees by gender and age, 2016
» There are more women in part-time work than men, so their earnings are lower 
on average.
» Women take career breaks to have children and therefore miss out on promotional opportunities
.
» Women may accept low-paid and part-time jobs as hours are flexible and can fit in with childcare arrangem
ents.
» Women may face discrimination at work.
However, times are changin
g for females, especially those in more economically 
developed countries, such as the UK. For instance, there are more females than males in the UK enrolled on veterinary science courses, and subjects associated with medicine and education, at university. More than half of the head teachers (principals) in the UK are now females.
Differences between private and public sector 
workers
Workers in the private and public sectors tend to earn different wages. In 
theory, people in the private sector can earn more than workers in the public sector. In many countries, salaries in the public sector are typically less than those which can be earned in the private sector, but jobs are more secure and are often accompanied by a pension in retirement. Examples of public sector jobs are teachers, nurses, police officers, fire service officers and civil servants.
Private sector jobs typically have higher earning potential as private individuals 
and firms strive for profit maximisation (see Chapter 22). For example, average bonuses at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan Chase, and Morgan Stanley increased by 25 per cent from £100,000 ($129,205) in 2015 to £125,000 ($161,506) in 2016.
However, this often comes with more risk as jobs are less secure in the private 
sector and workers often have to save up for their own pensions in retirement. For example, the global financial crisis, which started in late 2008, caused over 11,000 job losses at Citibank Group by the end of 2013. US investment bank JP Morgan Chase cut 19,000 jobs during the same time period.
▲ Female participation rates 
are increasing in many parts of the world
Study tip
It is incorrect to assume 
that those in the private sector get paid more than those in the public sector. This depends on many variables, such as the level of qualifications, skills and
 experience of 
the workers.
Study tip
Government policies 
affect labour markets, so have an impact on differences in earnings. For example, governments impose laws to protect the rights of workers and employers, although these vary between countries. Employment laws are designed to prevent discrimination between workers due to gender, race, religion or disability.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   119 14/02/18   8:52 AM18	 Workers
120Division of labour and specialisation 
of labour
Specialisation of labour occurs when a worker becomes an expert in a particular 
profession, such as a landscape architect, a psychiatric nurse, an electrical engineer or an economics professor. Division of labour occurs when a production process or task is split between different workers, who become experts in a part of the process. Examples are supermarket checkout operators, waiters serving people in a restaurant, and factory workers who operate machinery.
Advantages of division of labour and specialisation of labour for the individual 
(workers) and fi  rms include the following:
» Workers become experts in their fi  eld, so their productivity and effi  ciency increase.
» The quality of the product or service increases.
» Workers can become very skilful, so their earning potential may increase.
These advantages culminate in higher motivation, productivity, output and competitiveness for fi  rms.
Disadvantages of division of labour and specialisation of labour for the 
individual and fi  rms include the following:
» The work may become repetitive and boring.
» Workers may become alienated, especially those specialising in low-skilled 
work.
» The production process may become overspecialised — that is, too dependent 
on an individual worker or group of workers.
» The workers may become deskilled in other areas — in other words, there is a 
lack of fl  exibility.
These disadvantages culminate in lower motivation, productivity and output for fi  rms.
The advantages and disadvantages of specialisation for the economy as a whole 
are outlined in Chapter 36.
Case  study: The rich and famous
There are some people with special talents or qualities who earn exceptionally high 
wages. Examples are supermodels, top footballers and tennis players, and famous celebrities and ‘A-list’ actors. This is because their skills are exceptional and are in short supply, and thus their labour supply curve is price inelastic as shown in Figure 18.8.
We
Number of movie starsNeSL
DL
OWage of /f_ilm
star ($)
▲ Figure 18.8 Price inelastic supply of Hollywood movie stars
Deﬁ  nitions
Specialisation of labour 
refers to workers being expert in a particular profession.Division of labour refers to workers being expert in a particular production process.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   120 24/01/18   11:22 AMDivision of labour and specialisation of labour
121There are only a fi  nite number of top Hollywood movie stars (N e), so the equilibrium 
wage rate will be relatively high (W e). Such special talents allowed Taylor Swift to be paid 
$170 million in 2016, and J. K. Rowling, the author of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find 
Them, to earn $50 million in the same year.
▲ J. K. Rowling earned $50 million in 2016. She earns money from box-offi  ce takings, Harry 
Potter book rights and merchandising spin-offs
Activities
1 Investigate the highest-earning male and female: 
a fi  lm (movie) stars
b tennis playersc pop singers or rappersd other category of your choice
2 Discuss possible reasons for any differences in the earnings.
Activities
1
 Investigate the highest-earning male and female: 
 fi  lm (movie) stars
Exam-style questions
1 Which term describes the lowest amount of pay that a fi  rm can reward its 
employees, as stipulated by the government?  [1]
A Equilibrium wage rate
B Fringe benefi  tsC National minimum wageD Wages per hour
2 Which option is a disadvantage of division of labour?  [1]
A A lack of labour fl  exibilityB Production processes may be overspecializedC Unemployment as a result of higher wagesD Work may become repetitive and boring
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   121 24/01/18   11:22 AM18	 Workers
122
Chapter review questions
 1 How do wage and non-wage factors differ, regarding a worker’s choice of 
occupations?
 2 What are fringe benefi  ts?
 3 How are wages determined?
 4 What is meant by the demand for labour, and what are the factors that affect the 
demand for labour?
 5 What is derived demand?
 6 What is meant by the supply of labour, and what are the factors that affect the 
supply of labour?
 7 Why might the supply of labour curve be backward bending after a certain wage rate 
is reached?
 8 How are wages determined in a market economy?
 9 How might a national minimum wage affect the demand for and supply of labour?
10 What are the various factors that infl  uence differences in earnings between workers?
11 How do the division of labour and specialisation of labour improve productivity and 
effi  ciency?
Revision checklist
✔ An individual’s choice of occupation depends on many factors, which can 
be categorised as wage- and non-wage factors.
✔ Wage factors are the ﬁ  nancial rewards that workers receive.
✔ Non-wage factors are the non-ﬁ  nancial factors that inﬂ  uence an 
individual’s choice of occupation.
✔ Wages are determined by the interaction of the demand for labour and 
the supply of labour .
✔ The demand for labour is the number of workers that ﬁ  rms are willing 
and able to hire at a given wage rate.
✔ The supply of labour refers to everyone in an economy who is of working 
age and is both willing and able to work at different wage rates.
✔ The equilibrium wage rate is determined when the demand for labour is 
equal to the supply of labour .
✔ The national minimum wage is the lowest amount a ﬁ  rm can pay its 
workers as set by the government.
✔ The various factors that inﬂ  uence differences in earnings between 
workers include: level of skills, the production sector, gender, private or 
public sector employment and the age of the worker .
✔ Specialisation of labour refers to workers being expert in a particular 
profession.
✔ Division of labour refers to workers being expert in a particular 
production process.
 An individual’s choice of occupation depends on many factors, which can 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   122 24/01/18   11:22 AM123
 19  Trade unions
Trade unions
A trade union (also known as a labour union) is an organisation which exists to 
protect the rights of workers. Trade unions originated in the nineteenth century in the UK and the USA. Workers often worked in very poor conditions, so trade unions were created to bargain for better terms and working environments for their members. A worker becomes a member of a trade union by paying a subscription fee, usually on a yearly basis. The membership fees help to pay for the administrative and legal expenses of operating the trade union.
Employees (workers) and employers often have different aims and objectives. 
For example, in addition to maintaining a happy and well-motivated workforce, employers may want to:
» maximise profi  ts
» minimise costs
» maximise sales.
On the other hand, employees may want to:
» maximise wages/salaries
» work in a safe and healthy environment
» have good terms and conditions at work
» maximise their non-wage benefi  ts
» have job security at work.
There is often a confl  ict between the aims of employees and employers. For example, an increase in wages along with a decrease in working hours will increase costs to employers but improve the terms of employment for workers. 
Case study: UN Declaration of Human Rights
Article 23 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights supports trade 
unions and decrees that all people should work in a safe environment for a fair amount of pay. It states the following:
1 Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just (fair) and favourable 
conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.
2 Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to equal pay for equal work.3 Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration (pay and benefits), 
ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity.
4 Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.
Source: United Nations
Deﬁ  nition
A trade union is an 
organisation which aims to protect the interests of its worker members, i.e. their terms and conditions of employment, including pay.
Study tip
It is possible for the aims 
of both employees and employers to be met at the same time. For example, fi  rms may agree to the demands of trade unions in return for productivity gains from their workforce.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne a trade union
★ discuss the role of trade unions in the economy
★ discuss the advantages and disadvantages of trade union membership.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   123 24/01/18   11:22 AM19	 trade	unions
124Types of trade union
There are several types of trade union:
» Craft unions — these are the oldest type of trade union and were formed 
originally to organise workers according to their particular skill (or craft). For example, engineers and printers formed their own separate unions as did carpenters, plasterers and electricians.
» Industrial unions — these trade unions represent all workers in their industry, irrespective of their skills or the type of work done. An oil workers’ union would include workers involved in the exploration, extraction, storage and refi  ning of oil, and any other jobs associated with the oil industry. The United Auto Workers Union of the United States is an example of an industrial union.
» ‘White collar’ unions — these labour unions recruit professional, administrative and clerical staff (salaried workers) and other non-manual workers. They are common in teaching, banking, the civil service and local government.
» General unions — these trade unions are usually prepared to accept anyone, regardless of the place they work, the nature of their work, or their industrial qualifi  cations. They tend to have a very large membership of unskilled workers. ‘Unite’ is a very large general union in the UK. Its members include drivers, warehouse workers, hotel employees and shop workers. The Australian Workers Union is the largest general union in Australia.
Some professions such as law, accountancy, engineering and medicine do not have trade unions because such work is governed by a professional body which sets entry requirements in terms of examinations, training and level of experience. The entry requirements are high and therefore the number of workers in each profession is controlled.
The role of trade unions in the economy
The primary role of a trade union is to protect the interests of its members. Examples of trade union roles and responsibilities are:
» bargaining with employers for pay rises and better terms and conditions
» ensuring equipment at work is safe to use (supported by health and safety 
legislation) and that workers are given suffi  cient training to enable them to perform their role at work safely
» ensuring members are given legal advice when necessary
» giving support to members when they are made redundant
» providing fi  nancial and legal support to workers who may have been unfairly 
dismissed or disciplined
» persuading the government to pass legislation in favour of workers, such as 
legislation covering minimum wages, maximum working hours, pension rights and the retirement age.
Trade unions act as a means of communication and negotiation between employers and employees through a process called collective bargaining. This occurs when a trade union representative, who is voted into their position by union members, negotiates on behalf of the workers for better pay and conditions of work. A collective voice is more powerful than each worker negotiating individually with the employer.
Deﬁ  nition
Collective bargaining is 
the process of trade union representatives negotiating on behalf of their worker members with employer representatives for better pay and conditions.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   124 24/01/18   11:22 AMThe role of trade unions in the economy
125Trade unions with high membership tend to be more powerful than unions 
with a small number of members. If strong trade unions make full use of their 
bargaining power, they may succeed in getting larger and/or more frequent wage increases than weaker unions. This highlights the importance of ‘unionisation’ within trade unions — that is, the larger and more united the union, the better its bargaining position tends to be.
Unions may be affi  liated to a larger organisation which negotiates with 
the government, such as the Trades Union Congress (TUC) in the UK, and the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organisations in the USA. These organisations push for the legal protection of rights for workers, including the imposition of a national minimum wage, or an increase in its level.
Collective bargaining and wage claims
The claim for higher wages in the collective bargaining process is normally based on one or more of the following:
» a rise in the cost of living due to infl  ation (see Chapter 26), which reduces the 
real wage of trade union members
» workers in comparable occupations who have received a wage increase
» increased profi  ts of the fi  rm and industry as a whole, justifying a higher return 
for labour services
» an increase in the productivity of labour, further justifying an increase in 
wages.
As part of the collective bargaining process, especially if there are disputes with employer representatives, trade unions can call upon their members to take industrial action. This refers to any measure taken by a group of workers as a result of major disagreements or disputes with their employers. Table 19.1 outlines some of the actions in which trade union members can engage, in an attempt to get what they want from their employers during the process of collective bargaining.
Table 19.1 Types of industrial action
Industrial action Deﬁ  nition Impact on employers Impact on workers
Strike Trade union members refuse to 
work, i.e. they stop workingOutput of goods and services ceases, creating an instant and negative impact on the fi  rmWorkers do not get paid when/if they do not work, so lose wages/salaries
Work-to-rule Trade union members work to 
fulfi  l the minimum requirements of their job, literally, and do not go beyond what is written in their employment contractsBus drivers drive extremely slowly and stop at every bus stop regardless of whether there are any passengers who wish to get on or off. A school teacher does not take part in any extra-curricular activities or refuses to meet with students outside of lesson timeBus drivers and teachers are meeting their contractual responsibilities and therefore cannot be disciplined or sacked
Go-slow Trade union members complete their work very slowlyProductivity and effi  ciency fall Morale may drop as a result of 
low targets and productivity
Sit-in Trade union members turn up to work and occupy the premises but do not undertake their normal workProduction of goods and services ceases temporarily and this has an immediate impact on the fi  rmA loss in wages and, if sustained, falling standards of living
Deﬁ  nition
Industrial action refers to measures taken by trade union members as a result of major disagreements or disputes with their employers, e.g. strike action.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   125 24/01/18   11:22 AM19	 trade	unions
126Exam-style questions
In February 2013 the region of Kerala in India came to a standstill due to a 
nationwide strike called by a general trade union. The members of the trade union belonged to all sectors of the workforce, from banking to transport. Workers demanded price controls to bring a halt to the increasing prices of necessities, enforcement of labour laws in all places of work and an increase in the minimum wage.
a Identify two factors which caused the trade union members in 
Kerala to strike. [2]
b Discuss how effective you think the strike would be in successfully 
getting the demands of the trade union met. [6]
Case study: Hong Kong dock workers’ strike
On 28  March 2013 a group of dock workers 
belonging to the Union of Hong Kong 
Dockers went on strike because their demands for a pay increase of 20 per cent had been rejected by Hong Kong International Terminals (HIT). The workers had demanded the pay rise to maintain a reasonable standard of living at a time of rising prices. HIT, their employer, offered a pay rise of between 3 and 5 per cent. 
HIT is part of the Hutchinson Whampoa 
Group of companies which belongs to Li Ka-shing, Asia’s richest man. On 18 April the dock workers protested outside the offi  ce building of Li Ka-shing. 
The International Transport Workers’ 
Federation, which represents the interests of 4.5 million transport workers worldwide, became involved in discussions to see how it could support the strike. A small group of Australian dock workers fl  ew to Hong Kong to support the workers and show solidarity with the strikers.
Activity
Investigate the number and types of unions that exist in your country. Find a recent example of industrial action that has taken place and determine whether the action was successful or not in achieving its aim.
Activity
Investigate the number and types of unions that exist in your country. Find a recent 
example of industrial action that has taken place and determine whether the action was 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   126 24/01/18   11:23 AMThe role of trade unions in the economy
127Exam-style questions
In September 2012, the Australian Educators Union (AEU) in the state of 
Victoria called on teachers working in the public sector to take part in two one-day strikes. The teachers were asking the government for a 30 per cent pay increase over a three-year period. Then, without consulting its members, the union decreased the teachers’ demands and asked the government to increase wages by 12 per cent over three years. The government did not agree to the demands and instead put in place a wage ceiling (maximum pay increase) of 2.5 per cent per year. It also called for the introduction of performance-related pay and further increases in productivity. The wage ceiling was part of a government strategy to cut public sector spending in Victoria.
a Give two reasons why the Australian Educators Union (AEU) reduced 
the demands for a pay increase without consulting its members. [2]
b Analyse the impact of a strike on the teachers, school children and the wider economy. [6]
c Discuss reasons why the government did not agree to the 12 per cent pay increase. [8]
Factors infl  uencing the strength of trade unions
The two main factors affecting the strength of trade unions are their number of members and the degree of their unity. Trade union membership is growing in some countries, such as China. In others, such as the UK, union membership is declining. Possible reasons for a higher level of trade union membership in some countries are:
» growth in manufacturing jobs in these countries — manufacturing industry is 
often unionised as workers typically receive low pay and have poor working conditions
» a widening wealth gap and higher costs of living which have caused workers to 
petition for higher wages and better working conditions.
Possible reasons for declining trade union membership in other countries include:
» government legislation which seeks to reduce trade union infl  uence (see 
supply-side policies, Chapter 28)
» a decline in manufacturing jobs in these countries, as manufacturing is 
traditionally unionised
» growth in part-time employment, as part-time workers are less likely to join a 
trade union
» a growing number of fi  rms independently agreeing to fairer terms and 
conditions of employment, as part of their corporate social responsibility, without negotiating with trade unions
» an increase in unemployment (see Chapter 30)
» an increase in employment in small fi  rms, as it is more diffi  cult to organise 
trade unions within such organisations
» an increase in the number of self-employed people (people who work for 
themselves and not for a fi  rm), and who are therefore not trade union members.
Deﬁ  nition
Corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) refers to the ethical approach taken by fi  rms towards their stakeholders (such as employees and customers) and the environment (such as adopting green technologies).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   127 24/01/18   11:23 AM19	 trade	unions
128In response to falling membership numbers, trade unions have tried to improve 
their image by making their services more appealing and relevant to today’s world. For example, the Association of Teachers and Lecturers (ATL) in the UK has a ‘no strike’ policy to which all members agree. Many unions now offer their members fi  nancial services (such as loans, mortgages, insurance, credit cards, discount holiday vouchers and discount car hire) as incentives to join. Some trade unions also provide grants for college courses, or arrange retraining programmes (the process of developing new skills) for their members who have been made redundant. All of these measures help to increase membership numbers and hence strengthen the infl  uence of trade unions.
Activity
Investigate the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees in your country. 
What role have trade unions played in this? Share your fi  ndings with the rest of the class.
Activity
Investigate the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees in your country. 
What role have trade unions played in this? Share your fi  ndings with the rest of 
Advantages and disadvantages of trade 
union membership
Trade unions often play a positive role in an economy for several reasons:
» They act as a channel of communication between employers (fi  rms) and 
employees (workers). Through negotiations and collective bargaining, they help 
to solve disputes and settle pay claims harmoniously and effi  ciently.
» They negotiate with employers on behalf of their members for better pay and 
working conditions. This benefi  ts the government as productivity also improves. Overall, there is a positive impact on standards of living.
» They negotiate with the government for the introduction of or an increase in 
the minimum wage, which can also help to increase standards of living for the poorest workers. Increased pay and improvements in working conditions may lead to a better motivated workforce and result in an increase in the profi  ts of fi  rms.
» Unions can help to reduce confl  ict and develop improved industrial relations, 
which ultimately benefi  ts fi  rms through improved labour productivity and higher employee motivation and loyalty. 
» They offer legal support and advice to workers who may have lost their jobs or 
be facing the threat of redundancies (job losses).
The potential negative impacts of trade unions on an economy include the following:
» Trade unions are often portrayed in the media as having a negative role in an 
economy when they take industrial action which may result in lost productivity. Strikes are the most extreme form of industrial action and can cause serious disruption to fi  rms and the wider economy.
» From an employer’s point of view, a trade union’s demands for better pay 
and conditions for its members may increase the fi  rm’s production costs and therefore reduce its profi  ts. If so, government tax revenues will also fall.
In many countries, being a member of a trade union is considered to be a basic human right. Individuals have freedom of association — they cannot be 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   128 24/01/18   11:23 AMAdvantages and disadvantages of trade union membership
129discriminated against for being a member of a trade union. However, even in 
these countries fi  rms (employers) are not obliged to recognise and negotiate with trade unions. Instead, they can set their own terms and conditions and rates of pay. In some countries, such as the United Arab Emirates, the law does not allow trade unions to exist.
Exam-style question
Which factor does not directly infl  uence the strength of trade unions? [1]
A Government policy
B The degree of unity of membersC The number of membersD Working hours and working conditions
Chapter review questions
 1 What is meant by a trade union?
 2 Why might a worker join a trade union?
 3 How do the aims and objectives of employees differ from those of employers?
 4 What are the main types of trade union?
 5 What are the main roles of trade unions?
 6 What is meant by the collective bargaining process?
 7 What is meant by industrial action and why might it occur?
 8 What are the different types of industrial action?
 9 What factors infl  uence the strength of trade unions?
10 What are the advantages and disadvantages of trade unions?
Revision checklist
✔ A trade union is an organisation which aims to protect the interests of 
its worker members — that is, their pay and terms and conditions of 
employment.
✔ Types of trade union include: craft unions, industrial unions, white collar 
unions and general unions.
✔ Collective bargaining is the process of trade union representatives 
negotiating on behalf of their worker members with employer representatives for better pay and conditions.
✔ Industrial action refers to measures taken by trade union members 
during major disagreements or disputes with their employers, such as strike action.
✔ The two main factors affecting the strength of trade unions are their 
number of members and their degree of unity.
✔ Advantages of trade unions include: acting as a communication channel 
between employers and employees, negotiating with employers for better pay and working conditions for their members, negotiating with the government on matters such as raising the minimum wage, and offering legal support and advice to member workers.
 A trade union is an organisation which aims to protect the interests of 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   129 24/01/18   11:23 AM130
 20  Firms
Classifi  cation of fi  rms
Economic sector
Firms can be classifi  ed according to the economic sector in which they operate:
» Primary sector — this sector of the economy contains fi  rms that extract raw 
materials from the earth. Examples are fi  shing, mining and agricultural farming.
» Secondary sector — this sector contains fi  rms that:– manufacture goods, changing raw materials into fi  nished products – construct buildings, roads and bridges.
» Tertiary sector — this sector contains fi  rms that provide services to the general public and other fi  rms. Examples are: retail shops, doctors, dentists, schools, hairdressers, advertising agencies, lawyers, fi  nancial advisers, insurance companies and banks.
▲ Agricultural workers operate in the primary sector
The primary, secondary and tertiary sectors of an economy are interdependent (they depend on each other). This is because a fi  rm cannot operate without using goods and services from all three sectors of industry to make and sell its goods or services to the fi  nal customer. Firms in the three sectors are linked through a process known as the chain of production (see the Yellow Moon case study).
Deﬁ  nition
Interdependence means 
that the three sectors of industry depend on each other, and cannot operate independently to produce goods and services.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ classify ﬁ  rms in terms of primary/secondary/tertiary sector and public/
private sector
★ understand the advantages and disadvantages of small ﬁ  rms
★ understand the causes of the growth of ﬁ  rms
★ discuss the advantages and disadvantages of different types of merger
★ understand economies and diseconomies of scale.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   130 24/01/18   11:23 AMClassification of firms
131Case study: Yellow Moon
Yellow Moon is an independent jewellery shop located in Pondicherry, India. The business 
owners design and make the jewellery in their workshop and it is sold to customers from its store and through the fi  rm’s website. Table 20.1 shows examples of goods and services from the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors that are necessary for Yellow Moon to operate successfully. The fi  rms in each sector represent links in the chain of production.
Table 20.1 Goods and services used by Yellow Moon
Activity/sector Examples of goods/services required 
Primary Silver, gold and semi-precious stonesSecondary Designers and jewellery makers to create the jewellery productsTertiary Advertising, insurance, banking and fi  nance, transport of fi  nished 
goods, website designers and a shop to sell the jewellery to customers
Activity
Refer to the Yellow Moon case study.
1 Identify the factors of production required by Yellow Moon to operate its business.
2 Produce a table like the one above for:
a a manufacturer of smartphonesb a fast-food restaurantc a shop selling kitchen equipmentd a pig farmer.
Activity
Refer to the Yellow Moon case study.
Public and private sectors
Firms can also be classifi  ed according to whether they operate in the private or 
public sector.
Private sector fi  rms are owned by private individuals and owners. Their main 
aim is to earn profi  t. The types of private sector fi  rm include:
» sole trader — a business owned and controlled by a single person
» partnership — a business owned by between two and twenty people, with 
share ownership and risk-taking
» private limited company — a business owned by shareholders, who are unable 
to buy or sell shares without the consent of other shareholders
» public limited company — a business owned by shareholders, who can openly 
and freely buy or sell their shares on a stock exchange.
Public sector fi  rms are owned by the government. Their main aim is to 
provide a service to the general public. For example, the government provides education and healthcare services for people who are unable and/or unwilling to pay for private education and private healthcare. In the UK, the public sector accounts for around 45 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) whereas in France this fi  gure is around 43 per cent, so both are good examples of mixed economies (see Chapter 15). Other examples are Australia, Japan, Iceland, Sweden and Italy.
Public sector organisations are wholly owned by the government and are 
therefore funded through tax revenues. Examples of public sector organisations are: water suppliers, sewerage providers, utilities (electricity and gas boards), the post offi  ce and state-owned news and broadcasting organisations (such as the BBC in the UK and ABC in Australia).
Deﬁ  nitions
The private sector refers to 
economic activity of private individuals and fi  rms. The private sector’s main aim is to earn profi  t for its owners.Public sector refers to economic activity directly involving the government, such as the provision of state education and healthcare services. The public sector’s main aim is to provide a service.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   131 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 FirMs
132The relative size of fi  rms
A third way to classify fi  rms is according to their relative size. In every economy 
there are fi  rms of different sizes. Small fi  rms, such as local grocery stores and sole traders, co-exist alongside large multinational companies such as Walmart and Toyota. A business may start as one store and grow over time. For example, Starbucks opened its fi  rst coffee shop in Seattle, USA in 1971 and now has around 24,500 stores in over 70 countries. Alternatively, a business may choose to stay small, such as a wedding dress designer, a hairdresser or an owner of a small gift shop.
The relative size of a fi  rm can be measured in different ways. The following are 
some examples:
» Number of employees — GlaxoSmithKline is one of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies, and has around 100,000 employees. McDonald’s is the world’s largest fast-food chain, and employs over 375,000 people worldwide. A small local grocery shop may have only fi  ve employees.
» Market share — this measures a fi  rm’s sales revenues as a proportion of the industry’s sales revenue. For example, Nestlé dominates the food and beverages market in Pakistan as it is the leading company in milk production and related products (such as yogurt, milk powder and butter). It also dominates the bottled water market in Pakistan. Google is the world’s market leader for search engines, and Coca-Cola is the largest manufacturer of soda drinks. Hertz, Enterprise and Budget car hire companies collectively account for about 95 per cent of the car hire market in the USA.
» Market capitalisation of a fi  rm — this is the stock market value of a company, calculated by multiplying the total number of shares in the business by the current share price. Apple, Google, Microsoft, Berkshire Hathaway, Amazon.com and Facebook are among the largest companies in the USA, as measured by market capitalisation.
» Sales revenue of a fi  rm — this is measured by multiplying the unit price of a product by the quantity sold (see Chapter 22). For example, Walmart is the world’s largest retailer with annual sales in excess of $485 billion. Volkswagen is the world’s largest car maker, with annual sales in excess of $237 billion.
Case study: The dominance of large firms
Firms of all sizes exist in local, national and international markets. However, large fi  rms 
often dominate the industry. For example:
• The sports clothing industry is dominated by Nike, Adidas and Puma.
• The tennis racket industry is dominated by Wilson, Prince and Head.• The chocolate industry is dominated by Kraft, Mars, Nestlé and Ferrero Rocher.• The smartphones industry is dominated by Samsung, Apple and Huawei. • The market for search engines is dominated by Google, Bing and Yahoo! 
Small fi  rms
There are several reasons why small fi  rms co-exist with larger fi  rms in the 
economy:
» A small grocery store has to fi  nd a way to compete with supermarkets and 
it might do so by providing a range of goods which cannot be bought in a supermarket, such as speciality cheeses and wines.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   132 24/01/18   11:23 AMSmall firms
133» The small grocery store may be located in a remote area and be the only local 
seller of provisions.
» It may provide a personal shopping experience for customers, as compared to a 
self-service style experience at large supermarkets.
» Smaller shops can also adapt quickly to changing consumer tastes — for 
example, a small bakery may make more brown bread to cater for an increase 
in demand, or a small independently run magazine shop may order titles for individual customers.
Examples of products and services provided by small shops are made-to-measure clothing and custom-made furniture. They tend to focus on smaller markets and may cater for specifi  c tastes and to people with higher incomes.
▲ Bespoke suits are made by small, independent fi  rms
A sole trader (or sole proprietor) is an individual who owns his or her personal business. The owner runs and controls the business and is the sole person held responsible for its success or failure. This is the most common type of business ownership. Examples are self-employed painters and decorators, plumbers, mechanics, restaurateurs and freelance photographers. Sole proprietorships are often small family-run businesses and can be set up with relatively little capital, usually obtained from personal savings and borrowing.
Case study: Sole traders into big companies
Many of today’s well-known companies started as sole traders. For example, Chanel 
was started by Coco Chanel in 1910 and has a huge global presence today. Marks & Spencer was set up in 1904 by two partners, Michael Marks and Thomas Spencer (who originally operated as sole traders). Tesco, the world’s third largest retailer measured by profi  ts, was set up in 1919 as a sole proprietorship by Jack Cohen.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   133 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 Fir Ms
134Advantages of small firms
Benefits of small firms include the following:
» Few legal formalities exist. This means that sole proprietorships are quite easy 
to set up. Start-up costs are also usually much lower than in setting up larger types of business.
» The sole trader is the only owner of a firm and therefore receives all of the profits made by the business. This gives them an incentive to work hard to become successful.
» Being your own boss can have some advantages: not having to take orders from others, having flexibility in decision making (such as dictating your working hours), and enjoying higher self-esteem from being successful.
» Small businesses are likely to know their customers on a more personal level and this can lead to better relationships. Larger firms might not have the time to get to know their customers, so their services often become impersonal.
» Smaller firms are easier to manage and control. Larger firms can suffer from diseconomies of scale (see below) due to coordination problems.
Disadvantages of and challenges facing small firms
Small firms do, however, face some challenges:
» Small firms have limited start-up capital, which makes it difficult for them to raise finance to establish the business. Sole traders may find it difficult to secure any funds beyond their personal savings. Trying to expand the business can also be problematic due to the lack of sources of finance available to small businesses.
» Statistically, small firms have the largest risk of business failure. Even the successful ones usually face intense competition due to the vast number of small firms that exist. In addition, the presence of larger and more established businesses often poses a huge threat to the survival of smaller firms.
» The success of small firms very much depends on the abilities and commitment of the owners. Sole traders often have to do their own financial accounts, marketing and management of human resources. They are unlikely to be equally effective in the different roles, and having to do all these tasks adds to the workload, stress and challenges in running a small firm.
» Small firms often suffer from a lack of continuity. The running of the business can be jeopardised if the owner is not there, maybe due to going on holiday, or due to illness. This creates problems of continuity for small firms.
» As they are unable to exploit the benefits of large-scale production, small firms have higher unit costs of production. Subsequently, their prices tend to be less competitive than those of larger competitors (which benefit from economies of scale). This can reduce the competitiveness and profits of smaller firms.
Causes of the growth of firms
Firms can grow either internally (such as increasing their market share) or externally (such as through mergers).
Internal growth
Internal growth (or organic growth) occurs when firms expand using their own resources. Firms can grow by increasing the number of branches (stores) within 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   134 24/01/18   11:23 AMCauses of the growth of firms
135a particular country or by opening branches in different countries. They can also 
expand by selling their products in a greater number of countries and can fi  nance this expansion using profi  ts earned within the business. These strategies help the fi  rm to increase its market share. Coca-Cola now sells its cola drink in all but two countries in the world: North Korea and Cuba! 
External growth
External growth (or inorganic growth) occurs when expansion involves another organisation, such as through mergers, takeovers and franchises.
Mergers
In a merger, two fi  rms agree to form one new company. For example, the MTRC and KCRC railway companies in Hong Kong merged in 2007 to become one company which now is the only provider of railway and underground railways services in Hong Kong. They formed a monopoly (see Chapter 23), but any fare increases must be approved by the government. Another example is pharmaceutical giants Glaxo Wellcome and SmithKline Beecham, which merged to form GlaxoSmithKline, in a deal worth $75.96 billion in 2000.
We will consider the different types of merger in more detail in the next section.
Takeovers 
By buying a majority stake (share) in another business, a fi  rm can take over the target fi  rm and instantly increase its size. For example, the Indian car maker Tata Motors took over UK-owned Jaguar and Land Rover in 2008. Tata Motors is itself part of the much larger Tata Group of companies. Kraft Foods took over Cadbury in 2011 and now has Cadbury’s share of the global chocolate market. Microsoft bought Skype in 2011, which enabled the software giant to gain a larger share of the internet communications industry. Takeovers  can be hostile, which means 
that the fi  rm being taken over does not agree to the buyout. However, they can also be agreeable to both fi  rms.
▲ Microsoft’s purchase of Skype enabled the software giant to gain a larger share of the 
internet communications industry
Deﬁ  nitions
A merger occurs when two or more fi  rms join together to form just one fi  rm.A takeover occurs when a fi  rm is taken over by another fi  rm. A takeover may be hostile or the two fi  rms might have agreed to the takeover.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   135 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 FirMs
136Franchising 
In a franchise, an individual or a fi  rm purchases a licence from another fi  rm to 
trade using the name of the parent company. The Subway sandwich chain, established in the USA, has over 200 stores in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and this expansion is due to franchising.
Types of merger 
As explained in the previous section, a merger occurs when two or more fi  rms join together to form just one fi  rm. There are three main types of merger: horizontal, vertical and conglomerate. These types also apply to takeovers.
Horizontal mergers
A horizontal merger occurs when two or more fi  rms in the same industry integrate (join together). For example, AG Barr is the Scottish manufacturer of soft drinks Irn Bru, Tizer and Rubicon. In 2012, it merged with Britvic, another soft drinks manufacturer that makes Tango, J2O and Robinson’s Fruit Shoots.
▲ The merger of Barr and Britvic created one of Europe’s largest soft drinks companies
The merged fi  rms can benefi  t from:
» having higher market share
» gaining skilled employees from each other
» operating with fewer employees (as there is no need to hire two fi  nance 
departments, for example), so this may reduce costs of production
» taking advantage of economies of scale.
However, the potential costs or drawbacks include the following:
» There may be a duplication of resources, so some workers may lose their 
jobs. Job losses can cause anxiety, demotivate staff and lead to a fall in productivity.
» The newly formed, larger fi  rm may face increasing costs arising from 
diseconomies of scale (see below).
Deﬁ  nitions
A franchise involves a 
person or business buying a licence to trade using another fi  rm’s name, logos, brands and trademarks.A horizontal merger occurs 
when two or more fi  rms in the same economic sector of industry integrate.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   136 24/01/18   11:23 AMTypes of merger 
137» The new fi  rm may suffer from culture clashes between the merged businesses. 
Initially, this may cause communication and organisational problems for the fi  rm.
Vertical mergers
A vertical merger occurs when a fi  rm from one economic sector (primary, 
secondary or tertiary) merges with a fi  rm at a different stage of production. There are two types of vertical merger: backward and forward.
Backward vertical mergers
A backward vertical merger occurs when a fi  rm from the secondary sector merges with a fi  rm from the primary sector, or when a fi  rm from the tertiary industry merges with a fi  rm operating in the secondary or primary sector. For example, a factory in China that makes chicken nuggets for McDonald’s buys a chicken farm. The chicken farm supplies the factory with live chickens and eggs, produced for McDonald’s outlets for their breakfast products.
▲ Backward vertical integration
The benefi  ts of backward vertical integration in the above example include the following:
» The fi  rm in the secondary sector has control over the quality of raw materials 
with which it is supplied.
» The price of raw materials fall as the manufacturer does not have to pay 
another (external) fi  rm for the raw materials.
However, the drawbacks of backward vertical integration in the above example include the following:
» Costs of running the farm in the primary sector increase total costs as more 
land, labour and capital resources are required.
» Transport costs increase for the merged fi  rm as raw materials were previously 
delivered by external suppliers.
Deﬁ  nition
A vertical merger occurs 
when integration takes place between two fi  rms from different economic sectors of industry.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   137 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 Fir Ms
138Forward vertical mergers
A forward vertical merger occurs when a firm from the primary sector of industry 
merges with a firm in the secondary or tertiary sector, or when a firm from the secondary sector merges with a firm operating in the tertiary sector. For example, Apple, Levi’s and Replay all own shops in which to sell their manufactured products. Shell owns its entire chain of production: oil mines, oil processing plants and the petrol stations where consumers purchase fuel for their cars.
▲ Apple has shops all over the world dedicated to selling its own goods. Here is its flagship store 
in London’s Regent Street
Exam-style questions
Tyrrells is a UK manufacturer of hand-cooked crisps (chips), which are made 
from potatoes and other root vegetables. The founder of the business, William Chase, was originally a potato farmer, who sold his crops to supermarkets. The price of potatoes started to fall and he decided to add value to his potatoes by making them into packaged snacks in 2002. He invested in capital equipment and employed more staff to make the product, and his decision has led to an increase in revenue and growth of the business. In April 2008, Chase sold his majority stake in the company for £40 million ($51m).
a
 Identify the method of growth used by Tyrrells.  [1] 
b Explain one advantage of Tyrrells expanding into the manufacturing  
industry.  [2]
c Explain two reasons why production costs may have fallen after  the expansion.
 [4]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   138 24/01/18   11:23 AMTypes of merger 
139Conglomerate mergers
A conglomerate merger occurs when fi  rms from different economic sectors and in 
unrelated areas of business integrate with one another. They may form a single company or be part of a large group of companies. For example, a clothing manufacturer might merge with a chocolate producer. The two fi  rms are in the secondary sector of industry but operate in different areas of manufacturing. They can take advantage of risk-bearing economies of scale (see below) as diversifi  cation spreads risk.
An example of a conglomerate is the Tata Group which has over 100 different 
companies in its portfolio, ranging from hotels and hospitality enterprises to mining and air conditioning. Another example is the Swire Group, which owns businesses that operate in many different markets, including: retailing, beverages, aeronautical operations, property development, mining and car trading.
▲ Pacifi  c Place, a shopping mall complex in Hong Kong, is one of the core holdings of the Swire 
Group’s property portfolio
Deﬁ  nition
A conglomerate merger occurs when two or more fi  rms from unrelated areas of business integrate to create a new fi  rm.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   139 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 FirMs
140Diversifi  cation spreads risks because the conglomerate has a number of businesses 
in different sectors of industry. A failing business in the group may be protected by the successful businesses within the group’s larger portfolio.
However, the conglomerate may become too diverse and this may cause 
problems in the management of capital and human resources. If a segment of the diversifi  ed fi  rm is under-performing, then it may drain resources from other areas of the conglomerate business.
Economies and diseconomies of scale
Economies of scale
Large fi  rms are able to take advantage of economies of scale, which reduce their average costs of production. This gives them a cost advantage over small fi  rms. In many countries, small grocery stores exist alongside large supermarkets. However, supermarkets are able to provide customers with:
» a wide choice of particular products, such as different kinds of fruit, 
vegetables, cheeses and wines
» a wide product range, so in a single store, customers can buy fresh milk, a pair 
of shoes, a teapot, a hairdryer, books or even a television. 
Modern supermarkets often have other facilities for customers, such as a café, a petrol (gas) station and cash machines. Many supermarkets also have free parking facilities, and therefore provide a one-stop shopping service.
The phrase ‘economies of scale’ can be broken down as follows. One meaning 
of the word ‘economy’ is reduced expenditure, or saving. The word ‘scale’ refers to size. Therefore, the term ‘economies of scale’ means that average costs of production fall as a fi  rm grows or increases its output. 
Internal economies of scale 
Internal economies of scale are cost savings that arise from within the business as it grows.
» Purchasing (bulk-buying) economies of scale occur when the cost of raw 
materials, components or fi  nished goods falls when they are bought in large quantities. 
» Technical economies of scale occur when large fi  rms purchase expensive 
pieces of machinery and automated equipment for the production process. Large fi  rms also produce in large quantities and therefore the high initial cost of the machinery and equipment can be spread across the high quantity of output. 
» Financial economies of scale occur as large fi  rms are able to borrow money 
from banks more easily than small fi  rms because they are perceived by fi  nancial institutions to be less risky. A large fi  rm will also have a greater value of assets, which can act as security for loans and mortgages.
» Managerial economies of scale occur if large fi  rms have the resources 
to employ specialist managers to undertake functions within the fi  rm. For example, despite the high salaries paid by large fi  rms to attract accountants, engineers and human resources specialists, the overall productivity of the fi  rm might increase, thereby helping to cut unit costs.Study tip
Although it is the aim of 
many fi  rms to expand and increase their market share, it is not always the case that ‘big is best’. A fi  rm that becomes too large may lose its appeal and its products may become mass produced and therefore lack character. Large hotel chains can guarantee a level of service which is of high quality and matches their 4- or 5-star rating, but the experience for the consumer is the same regardless of location. There will always be a place in the market for small or boutique hotels offering a high-quality and unique experience.
Deﬁ  nitions
Economies of scale are the cost-saving benefi  ts of large-scale operations, which reduce average costs of production.Internal economies of scale are economies of scale that arise from the internal organisation of the business, e.g. fi  nancial, bulk-buying and technical economies of scale.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   140 24/01/18   11:23 AMEconomies and diseconomies of scale
141» Risk-bearing economies of scale occur as very large fi  rms, such as 
conglomerates, produce a range of products and operate in many locations. This 
diversity spreads risks as weak sales in one country can be supported by strong sales in another. Samsung makes a large range of products, so if one product is experiencing decreasing sales then this loss can be balanced by increased sales of other products. 
» Research and development (R&D) economies of scale occur if large fi  rms 
are able to fund R&D and therefore can be innovative and create products that enable them to be market leaders. For example, GlaxoSmithKline is a large pharmaceutical company that spends around 15 per cent of its sales revenue (or over $6 billion) on R&D.
» Marketing economies of scale occur as large fi  rms tend to have large 
advertising budgets, so can spend large amounts of money on promoting their products. For example, a Nike or IKEA advert enables all products under the Nike brand or all products sold in IKEA stores to be promoted in a cost-effective way.
Activities
1 a Look for examples of bulk-buying economies of scale in your local supermarket. 
For instance, compare the cost per gram for a large bag of rice to that for a 
smaller bag of rice. 
b Study the labels on the supermarket shelves to fi  nd three more 
examples of purchasing economies of scale and be prepared to share your fi  ndings.
2 a Make a list of the names of businesses that advertise using billboards and on 
the television. 
b Consider what these fi  rms have in common. Are they large or small? c Consider how this links to the concept of economies of scale. 
Activities
1 a
 Look for examples of bulk-buying economies of scale in your local supermarket. 
External economies of scale
External economies of scale are economies that arise due to the location of the 
fi  rm and are therefore external to the business. Examples of external economies of scale include the following:
» Proximity to related fi  rms — Tiruppur in India is renowned for textile and garment manufacturing. A garment manufacturer will benefi  t from having fi  rms which produce zippers, buttons, thread and fabrics located nearby, as this will give it easy access to its suppliers and reduce transportation costs.
» Availability of skilled labour — in Tiruppur, there is a pool of skilled machinists and pattern cutters. This makes recruitment of textile workers with the necessary skills relatively easy, thereby cutting costs for fi  rms in the industry.
» Reputation of the geographical area — this provides all fi  rms in the industry with free publicity and exposure. For example, Silicon Valley in California has a worldwide reputation as an area for software creation and the development of information technology systems. Hence, a large number of suitably qualifi  ed and skilled workers fl  ock to the area.
» Access to transportation networks — manufacturing fi  rms benefi  t from being located near to major road networks, ports and cargo facilities. A café or restaurant benefi  ts from being close to other shops, public transport links and parking facilities. China has invested heavily in developing its infrastructure to 
Deﬁ  nition
External economies of scale  
are economies of scale that 
arise from factors outside of the fi  rm, e.g. the location of the fi  rm, proximity to transport, and the availability of skilled workers.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   141 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 FirMs
142facilitate effi  cient transportation of fi  nished goods to ports and airports. This 
gives it a competitive advantage over India, which has less developed roads and rail networks.Costs ($)
OutputCommunication problems
Clash of culturesNeed to increase plant size Loss of staff moraleReduced control and coordinationBulk buyingMarketingManagerialFinancialRisk bearingTechnicalR&DDiseconomies of scale Economies of scale
Average costs
▲ Figure 20.1 Internal economies and diseconomies of scale
Diseconomies of scale 
Diseconomies of scale arise when a fi  rm gets too large, so its average costs of 
production start to rise as output increases. At this stage, the disadvantages of growth start to outweigh the advantages.
lack of motivation slower decision making poorer communicationDISECONOMIES
OF SCALE
these raise
average costs
▲ Figure 20.2 Diseconomies of scale
Reasons for the increased average costs of production include the following:
» Communication issues may arise when a fi  rm becomes too large. There may be 
too many branches to control and communicate with effectively, so decision making may be slow due to the number of people in the communication chain. This may lead to increased costs of production.
» A merger between two fi  rms may be unsuccessful due to a clash of 
organisational cultures, so it may be benefi  cial to demerge. In 2010, the Fosters Group, which produces beer, sold off its less profi  table wine business as the merger had not brought about the benefi  ts of economies of scale. The demerger allowed Fosters to focus on beer production again.
Deﬁ  nition
Diseconomies of scale 
occur when average costs of production start to increase as the size of a fi  rm increases.
Deﬁ  nition
A demerger occurs when two previously merged fi  rms decide to break up and become two separate fi  rms. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   142 24/01/18   11:23 AMEconomies and diseconomies of scale
143» It may be necessary to employ more employees for all the branches of the firm, 
or a new factory may need to be built to accommodate the increased level of production. This will add to total costs of production and average costs of production may rise.
» Workers within a large organisation may find it difficult to feel part of a large firm, so this may lead to a lack of motivation and reduced productivity. Average costs will tend to rise as a result.
» The business may become too diverse and start to operate in areas in which it has less expertise. Reduced control and coordination may cause costs to increase. Again, this can lead firms to demerge.
Exam-style questions
In 2010, T-Mobile and Orange merged to become one telecommunications company. After the merger, customers of Orange and T-Mobile could switch between networks and the combined firm was able to reduce the number of aerial masts required and had an increased share of the market.
The two brands are owned by a company called Everything Everywhere, which 
in September 2012 changed its name to EE. EE provides 4G services to its customers and T-Mobile and Orange continue to serve their own segments of the market. T-Mobile is considered to be a value-for-money brand and Orange a more premium brand.
a
 Explain one type of economy of scale which could be achieved by the 
merger between T-Mobile and Orange.  [2]
b Explain two diseconomies of scale which may arise in the future.  [4]
c Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the merger between the two telecommunication firms.
 [8]
Exam-style questions
1 Which option is an external economy of scale?  [1]
A Availability of skilled labour
B Bulk-buying
C Financial
D Risk-bearing
2 What occurs when firms expand using their own resources?  [1]
A External economies of scale
B External growth
C Internal economies of scale
D Internal growthStudy tip
In the real world, it can 
be difficult for firms to determine when they have reached their lowest average cost and therefore their ideal level of production. Many factors influence costs, and firms operate in a constantly changing environment. A firm’s decision to downsize or demerge from another firm may be based on non-cost reasons, such as difficulties in control and coordination, high staff turnover or a loss of focus.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   143 24/01/18   11:23 AM20	 FirMs
144
Chapter review questions
 1 What are the differences between the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors of the 
economy?
 2 Why are the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors said to be interdependent?
 3 How does the private sector differ from the public sector?
 4 How might the size of fi  rms be measured?
 5 Why do so many small fi  rms exist?
 6 What are the advantages and disadvantages of small fi  rms?
 7 How does internal growth differ from external growth?
 8 What is the difference between a merger and a takeover?
 9 How do horizontal, vertical and conglomerate mergers differ from each other?
10 What are the advantages and disadvantages of a merger?
11 How do economies of scale differ from diseconomies of scale?12 How do internal and external economies of scale differ from each other?13 What is a demerger and why might it occur?
Revision checklist
✔ The primary sector of the economy contains ﬁ  rms that extract raw 
materials from the earth — for example, ﬁ  rms involved in ﬁ  shing, mining 
and agricultural farming.
✔ The secondary sector of the economy contains ﬁ  rms that manufacture 
goods.
✔ The tertiary sector contains ﬁ  rms that provide services to the general 
public and other ﬁ  rms — for example, retail, legal, ﬁ  nancial and accounting services.
✔ Private sector ﬁ  rms are owned by private individuals and owners, and 
their main aim is proﬁ  t maximisation.
✔ Public sector ﬁ  rms are owned by the government, and their main aim is 
to provide a service to the general public.
✔ The various ways to measure the size of ﬁ  rms include: the number of 
employees, market share, market capitalisation and sales revenue.
✔ Small ﬁ  rms are able to co-exist with larger ﬁ  rms due to the advantages 
of being small — for example, low set-up costs, proﬁ  t incentives and being able to provide a personalised service.
✔ Growth of ﬁ  rms can occur internally (organically) or externally 
(inorganically).
✔ A merger occurs when two or more ﬁ  rms join together to create 
one ﬁ  rm.
✔ There are different types of merger: horizontal, vertical and 
conglomerate mergers.
✔ Economies of scale are the cost-saving beneﬁ  ts of large-scale 
operations, which reduce average costs of production. They can be classiﬁ  ed as internal or external economies of scale.
✔ Diseconomies of scale occur when average costs of production start to 
increase as the size of a ﬁ  rm increases.
✔ A demerger occurs when two previously merged ﬁ  rms decide to break 
up and become two separate ﬁ  rms.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   144 24/01/18   11:23 AM145
 21  Firms and production
The demand for factors of production
Factors of production (see Chapter 2) are the resources used to produce goods 
and to provide services. The four factors of production are:
» Land — natural resources used in the production process, such as raw materials, fi  sh and physical land.
» Labour — the physical and mental human input into the production process. 
This includes the level of skills, qualities and qualifi  cations of the workforce, and not only the number of workers.
» Capital — manufactured goods used to produce other goods and to provide 
services, such as tools, machinery, vehicles, computers, factories and roads.
» Enterprise — risk takers who provide the ideas and know-how to organise the 
other three factors of production in the pursuit of profi  t.
In general, the demand for any factor of production is of derived demand. This means that the demand for factors of production depends on the demand for the goods and services which the factors will be used to produce. For example, economics lecturers at university are hired only if there is demand for economics courses from undergraduates.
On a macroeconomic scale, the demand for the factors of production in a 
country results from the total level of demand for goods and services in the economy. For instance, during an economic recession (see Chapter 29), fi  rms will demand less labour.
In addition to the derived demand for land, labour and capital, the demand for 
factors of production also depends on their cost, availability and quality.
» The cost of factors of production — the higher the cost of land, labour and 
capital, the lower their demand tends to be. For example, Apple outsources the production of its iPhones and iPads to Foxconn, a Taiwanese manufacturer based in China, due to the relatively low costs of land and labour there. By contrast, if labour costs are relatively high compared to the cost of capital, then workers might be replaced by machinery and technology. The demand for capital depends on the cost of borrowing money — higher interest rates increase the cost of fi  nancing capital-intensive production.
» The quantity (or availability) of factors of production — the greater the 
availability of land, labour and capital, the lower their cost tends to be, and hence the higher their demand. For example, the relatively large size and availability of the workforce in India and China has boosted the demand for labour from multinational companies seeking to expand their operations. In 
Deﬁ  nition
Derived demand means 
that a factor of production is not demanded for its own sake, but for the goods and services that it is used to produce.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ describe what determines the demand for factors of production
★ explain the advantages and disadvantages of labour-intensive and 
capital-intensive production
★ distinguish between and explain the inﬂ  uences on production and 
productivity.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   145 24/01/18   11:23 AM21	 FirMs	and	production
146general, the greater the quantity of a factor of production, the lower its cost 
tends to be.
» The productivity of factors of production — better-quality resources tend to 
demand a higher price due to their high productivity. For example, surgeons, pilots and barristers are in high demand due to their highly valued skills and qualifi  cations. China, India, Vietnam and Thailand have good-quality land for growing rice, whereas Scandinavian countries do not have the natural climate to do so.
▲ Cold climates are not good for agricultural production
Activity
Foxconn is a Taiwanese company that makes electronics products such as the iPhone, 
PlayStation, Kindle and Wii. It has operations throughout the world, including in China, Brazil, India, Malaysia and Mexico. 
Investigate the various reasons why companies such as Apple, Sony, Amazon and 
Nintendo might choose to use manufacturers such as Foxconn to produce goods on their behalf.
Activity
Foxconn is a Taiwanese company that makes electronics products such as the iPhone, 
PlayStation, Kindle and Wii. It has operations throughout the world, including in China, 
Labour-intensive and capital-intensive 
production
Production of goods and services requires the four factors of production in varying 
proportions. For example, in a school, capital resources and labour are required in greater quantities than land (natural resources). By contrast, production of 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   146 24/01/18   11:23 AMLabour-intensive and capital-intensive production
147soft drinks such as Coca-Cola and Sprite requires a large amount of machinery and 
therefore this process is capital intensive because it requires more machinery (a capital resource) than labour.
An architectural fi  rm designs buildings. It requires qualifi  ed architects to 
create the designs and skilled technicians to use computer-aided design software to produce the drawings. Computers, software, offi  ce space and enterprise are required to design high-quality, creative buildings and to attract customers. The process is labour intensive because it requires a larger amount of human resources compared to technological resources and capital equipment.
Labour-intensive production
In labour-intensive industries, the cost of labour is proportionately higher than the cost of other factors of production. Examples are traditional forms of agricultural farming, teaching, psychiatry, physiotherapy, sports coaching, management consultancy and bespoke tailors.
▲ Fishing for scallops is labour intensive in China
Labour-intensive production can be very expensive. For example, in private fee-paying schools and health clinics, labour costs account for the largest proportion of production costs, so the price charged to customers is relatively high. Labour-intensive production processes tend to be used to produce individual or personalised products (such as a Hollywood movie or a custom-made wedding dress).
Deﬁ  nition
In labour-intensive 
industries, the cost of labour is proportionately higher than the cost of other factors of production, e.g. accountancy, real estate services and tourism.
Study tip
The term ‘labour costs’ 
does not refer only to a person’s wage or salary, but the overall pay package. This could include other fi  nancial benefi  ts such as overtime pay, bonuses, housing allowances and company cars.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   147 24/01/18   11:23 AM21 FIRMS AND PRODUCTION
148Case study: Professional football
Professional football (soccer) is highly labour intensive. The top-earning players in the 
world enjoy celebrity status and are rewarded generously for their services. The top ten highest-paid footballers in 2017 are listed in Table 21.1.
▲ Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi consistently feature in the highest-paid footballers list
Table 21.1 Top ten highest-paid footballers, 2017
Rank Player Total earnings ($m) Club
1 Cristiano Ronaldo 93 Real Madrid
2 Lionel Messi 80 Barcelona
3 Neymar, Jr 37 Barcelona
4 Gareth Bale 34 Real Madrid
5 Zlatan Ibrahimovic 32 Manchester United
6 Wayne Rooney 24 Manchester United
7 Luis Suarez 23 Barcelona
8 Sergio Aguero 23 Manchester City
9 James Rodriguez 22 Real Madrid
10 Paul Pogba 21 Manchester United
Note: ﬁ  gures rounded to the nearest million dollars
Source: Forbes
Activity 
Discuss whether economics is more important than ethics in deciding how much 
professional sports people should be paid.
Activity 
Discuss whether economics is more important than ethics in deciding how much 
professional sports people should be paid.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   148 06/02/18   12:38 PMLabour-intensive and capital-intensive production
149Exam-style questions
Study the hypothetical data below for two fi  rms and answer the questions that 
follow. The fi  gures show the amount of money spent by each industry on factors of production.
Firm Labour costs ($) Capital costs ($) Other costs ($)
A 20,000 10,000 10,000
B 40,000 40,000 20,000
a Defi  ne labour-intensive production. [2]
b Use the data above to explain why Firm A might be considered to be more 
labour intensive than Firm B, despite the latter spending twice as much on labour costs. [4]
Capital-intensive production
Capital-intensive production takes place if a fi  rm spends more on capital costs than on any other factor of production. This includes expenditure on capital equipment such as tools, equipment, machinery and vehicles. Therefore, fi  rms operating capital-intensive production need a lot of money to fund their activities. This can act as a barrier to entry since it proves expensive for new fi  rms to enter such industries. Examples are aircraft and motor vehicle manufacturers, soft drinks production and oil extraction.
▲ There are signifi  cant entry barriers into the car and aircraft manufacturing industries
Despite the initially high costs of capital-intensive production, there are potentially huge cost savings in the form of technological economies of scale in the long run (see Chapter 20). Firms that become more capital intensive 
Deﬁ  nition
In capital-intensive 
industries, the use and cost of capital is more prominent than that of any other factor of production, e.g. car manufacturing.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   149 24/01/18   11:23 AM21	 Fir Ms	and	production
150usually do so to increase their output and productivity levels by mass producing 
their products. In this way, their unit costs of production are relatively low. As countries such as India and China industrialise, production also tends to become more capital intensive.
Exam-style questions
Educational services are exploiting the use of technology in the twenty-first century. For example, long-distance learning technologies (such as e-learning and video conferencing) allow students to study courses from the comfort of their own homes without physically attending a university campus, replacing the traditional lecture-style experience.
a
 Explain two benefits of capital-intensive technologies in the  
provision of educational services.  [4]
b Discuss whether technology could ever replace the traditional  labour-intensive nature of teaching and learning.
 [8]
Choosing between capital- and labour-intensive 
production
Whether firms choose more capital- or labour-intensive production methods 
depends on several related factors:
» The cost of labour compared to the cost of capital — firms tend to choose more capital-intensive methods of production if labour costs are relatively high (assuming that they are able to substitute factors of production in the output process), and vice versa.
» The size of the market — capital-intensive production tends to take place for mass-market products such as soft drinks, passenger vehicles and consumer electronics. Labour-intensive methods are often used for personalised services, such as a private tutor, counsellor, adviser, instructor or coach.
» The firm’s objectives — profit maximisers operating in mass markets tend to opt for capital-intensive production in order to minimise their unit costs of production. Other firms might choose to use labour-intensive methods as they operate on a smaller scale or to safeguard jobs. For example, manufacturers such as Black & Decker operating in Shenzhen, China, use labour-intensive production methods in order to create jobs in the special economic zone (see Chapter 30), benefiting from tax incentives from the government.
Reasons for using capital-intensive production
Capital-intensive production may be preferred for the following reasons:
» Capital-intensive production enables firms to use mass production techniques, such as automation in car manufacturing. This enables more output to be produced in less time than using labour-intensive methods. For example, Coca-Cola produces 2000 cans of Coke per minute at its bottling plant when operating at full capacity!
» Unit costs of production are therefore relatively low. 
» The use of capital-intensive technologies reduces human error in the production process — that is, machinery is more accurate than humans in the production process.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   150 24/01/18   11:23 AMProduction and productivity
151However, there are drawbacks too. Capital-intensive methods of production can 
involve huge set-up costs (such as purchase and installation), running costs (such as servicing and maintenance) and replacement costs (when equipment becomes outdated and in need of upgrading). The reliance on assembly lines means any breakdowns will cause major problems for the business.
Reasons for using labour-intensive production
Labour-intensive production may be favoured for the following reasons:
» It is suitable for producing products that are highly customised 
(individualised), such as tailor-made suits and wedding gowns.
» Similarly, labour-intensive output enables customers to receive a personalised 
service, so it is appropriate for fi  rms to charge higher prices.
» As workers are highly skilled and experienced, the quality of the product will 
also be high.
» Labour-intensive production is more fl  exible than capital-intensive methods. 
Labour, unlike capital (such as machinery), can be used fl  exibly to meet changing levels of demand. For example, retail businesses tend to hire more temporary workers during peak trading seasons.
However, labour-intensive output can be expensive. Hiring highly skilled and experienced workers results in higher costs of production and hence a higher price charged to customers.
Production and productivity
Production refers to the total output of goods and services in the production process. Productivity is a measure of how well resources are used in the production process — that is, economic effi  ciency in the use of land, labour, capital and enterprise (see Figure 21.1).
For example, labour productivity measures the effi  ciency of the workforce 
in terms of output per worker. It can be improved by having a better-skilled workforce (through education and training) or by allowing workers to use better, more effi  cient technologies to increase their output. 
By contrast, the use of automation, such as robotics and specialised computer 
equipment in car manufacturing, can help to raise capital productivity without the need to hire more workers.
+=Factors of production
(land, labour and
capital)Productivity
(ef/f_iciency)Production
▲ Figure 21.1 The input–output process
Higher productivity is important for an economy for several reasons:
» Economies of scale — higher levels of output, whether through capital-
intensive or labour-intensive methods of production, help to reduce unit costs (see Chapter 22). These cost-saving benefi  ts can be passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices. For example, the mass production of 4K HDR 
Deﬁ  nitions
Production refers to the 
total output of goods and services in the production process.Productivity is a measure of effi  ciency found by calculating the amount of output per unit of a factor input, e.g. output per worker or output per machine hour.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   151 24/01/18   11:23 AM21	 Fir Ms	and	production
152televisions and digital cameras has made these products much more affordable 
to many customers around the world. In addition, cost savings from higher productivity levels can help firms to earn more profit on each item sold.
» Higher profits — productivity gains are a source of higher profits for firms. These profits can be reinvested in the business to fund research and development or to expand the operations of the business. Either way, higher profits help to fund the long-term survival of the firm.
» Higher wages — highly productive firms that enjoy cost savings and higher profitability can afford to pay higher wages to their workers, especially if they become more efficient. Such firms also tend to attract the best workers as people prefer to work for firms with better prospects and profitability.
» Improved competitiveness — productive firms are more efficient and so can compete more effectively on a global scale. For example, Samsung’s efficiency gains during the late 2000s ensured the South Korean company took market share from Nokia and Apple to become the market leader in the smartphones industry.
» Economic growth — productivity is a source of economic growth because it increases the productive capacity of an economy, thus shifting out its production possibility curve (see Chapter 4). This helps to raise employment and standards of living in the economy. Higher wages, from improved efficiency of firms and higher labour productivity, also mean the government collects more tax revenue to fund its expenditure on the economy (see Chapter 26).
The difference between productivity and production
Productivity is a measure of the degree of efficiency in the use of factors inputs in the production process. It takes an average measure of this efficiency, such as output per worker, sales revenue per person, or output per machine hour. Alternatively, productivity can be measured as a ratio, such as the value of output compared to the cost of the inputs (the factors of production).
By contrast, production refers to the total output of goods and services in the 
production process. Production can be increased either by using more factor inputs or by raising the productivity of existing factors of production.
Exam-style questions
Study the data below for two real estate firms selling residential property over a typical weekend. The number of units sold and the number of sales staff involved are also shown.
Firm Total sales ($) Units sold Sales staff
Sharma Realty 3,950,000 10 8
Urvashi Realty 3,800,000 14 10
a Calculate the labour productivity as measured by sales per worker for  both Sharma Realty and Urvashi Realty.
 [2]
b Use the information above to comment on why it might be difficult to  decide whether Sharma Realty and Urvashi Realty is the more  productive firm.
 [4]Study tip
Higher productivity 
increases the output of goods and services. However, increasing the number of workers or any other factor input does not necessarily increase output unless these resources are used efficiently. Firms that operate on a larger scale can suffer from diseconomies of scale (see Chapter 20).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   152 24/01/18   11:23 AMProduction and productivity
153Infl  uences on productivity
The fi  ve main factors infl  uencing the rate of productivity growth are as follows:
» Investment — this is the expenditure on physical capital such as machinery, 
equipment and buildings. For example, investment in the latest technologies 
generally helps workers to do their jobs better — that is, to produce more and better-quality output. The degree of investment in turn is determined by the level of interest rates (see Chapter 27). In general, the higher the interest rate, the more expensive capital expenditure will be, thus discouraging investment in the economy.
» Innovation — this refers to the commercialisation of new ideas and products. The invention of tablet computers and smartphones has transformed the way many people work, as they are able to conduct their business while mobile rather than at the offi  ce. Such innovations have increased the speed of work, improved communications and enhanced organisation at work. Thus, innovation can boost productivity.
» Skills and experience — the productivity of labour is determined by the 
quantity and quality of labour. The latter can be increased by improving the skills and experience of the labour force. Education and training, for example, enhance the human capital (skills and experiences of the workforce) in the economy, thus helping to increase productivity.
» Entrepreneurial spirit — entrepreneurs take risks in the production process in 
the pursuit of profi  t. They plan and organise the various factors of production in the production process. Productivity depends on the drive (motivation) of entrepreneurs, such as their willingness and ability to exploit new business opportunities.
» Competition — rivalry creates an incentive for fi  rms to be more productive. 
Without competition, fi  rms might lack the incentive to be effi  cient or innovative. By contrast, competition forces fi  rms to be more effi  cient, thus helping to boost the economy’s overall productivity.
Case study: Kodak
Kodak, once the largest fi  rm supplying photographic camera fi  lm, became complacent 
as rival fi  rms switched to the production of digital camera technology from the late 1990s. 
Founded in 1888, the American fi  rm had dominated throughout most of the twentieth 
century, with its market share reaching 90 per cent in 1976. Having failed to make any profi  t for fi  ve consecutive years, however, Kodak ceased its output of digital cameras and fi  led for bankruptcy in early 2012.
Discuss why productivity is important for the survival of fi  rms such as Kodak.
Exam-style question
Which option is not an indicator of productivity gains in an economy? [1]
A Greater number of people in the labour force
B Greater investment in research and developmentC Higher wages to motivate staff to work harderD Improved education and training
Deﬁ  nition
Innovation is the 
commercialisation of new ideas and products. It is a vital source of productivity.
▲ Innovation has helped business people boost productivity by working while on the move
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   153 24/01/18   11:23 AM21	 FirMs	and	production
154
Activity
Investigate the ways in which the level of productivity in your school might be improved. 
Try to make your recommendations realistic and be prepared to share your suggestions with the rest of the class.
Activity
Investigate the ways in which the level of productivity in your school might be improved. 
Try to make your recommendations realistic and be prepared to share your suggestions 
Chapter review questions
1 What are factors of production, and what are the four factors of production?2 Why is the demand for factors of production a derived demand?3 How does labour-intensive output differ from capital-intensive output?4 What are the factors that determine whether fi  rms are capital intensive or labour 
intensive?
5 How does production differ from productivity?6 Why is higher productivity important for an economy?7 What are the main determinants of productivity?
Revision checklist
✔ Factors of production (land, labour, capital and enterprise) are the 
resources required to produce goods and provide services.
✔ The demand for factor of productions is a derived demand — that is, their 
demand depends on the demand for the goods and services which they 
will be used to produce.
✔ The demand for factors of production also depends on their cost, 
availability and quality.
✔ In labour-intensive industries, the cost of labour is proportionately 
higher than the cost of other factors of production. Examples are often found in the service industries, such as accountancy, banking and tourism services.
✔ In capital-intensive industries, the use and cost of capital is more obvious 
than that of any other factor of production. Examples are often found in the manufacturing sector, such as car manufacturing.
✔ Production refers to the total output of goods and services in the 
production process.
✔ Productivity is a measure of how well (efﬁ  ciently) resources are used in 
the production process.
✔ Labour productivity measures the efﬁ  ciency of the workforce in terms of 
output per worker .
✔ The main determinants of productivity are: investment expenditure, 
innovation, skills and experiences of the labour force, entrepreneurial spirit and competition.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   154 24/01/18   11:23 AM155
 22  Firms’ costs, revenue and 
objectives
Costs of production
Costs of production are the payments made by fi  rms in the production process. 
Examples of costs of production are:
» wages and salaries paid to employees
» rent paid to land owners for hiring business premises
» advertising expenses
» purchases of raw materials and components from suppliers
» utility bills for telephone, gas and electricity services
» dividend payments to shareholders
» taxes paid to the government based on the value of company profi  ts.
Costs of production can be categorised in several ways.
Fixed costs
Fixed costs (FC) are the costs of production that have to be paid regardless of how much a fi  rm produces or sells (see Figure 22.1). For example, salaries for senior managers, insurance payments, administrative costs, bank loan repayments and rent all have to be paid regardless of the fi  rm’s output level.
Output level4000Fixed costs
OCost ($)
▲ Figure 22.1 Fixed costs for a fi  rm (with $4000 of fi  xed costs)
Variable costs
Variable costs (VC) are costs of production that change when the level of output changes. Examples are the costs of raw materials, component parts and the payment of wages needed to build houses — the more houses that are built, the higher these variable costs become. The total variable cost line 
Deﬁ  nitions
Costs of production refer to 
a fi  rm’s expenditure in the process of producing goods and/or providing services.Fixed costs are costs that a fi  rm has to pay irrespective of how much it produces or sells.Variable costs are those that change as the level of output changes. The higher the level of production, the greater the total variable costs will be.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne and calculate costs of production
★ draw and interpret diagrams that show how changes in output affect 
costs of production
★ deﬁ  ne revenue
★ deﬁ  ne and calculate total revenue (TR) and average revenue (AR)
★ explain the objectives of ﬁ  rms: survival, social welfare, proﬁ  t 
maximisation and growth.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   155 24/01/18   11:23 AM22	 FirMs’	costs,	reVenue	and	obJectiVes
156(see Figure 22.2) starts at the origin because when there is no output, no 
variable costs are incurred.
Output levelTotal variable costs
OCost ($)
▲ Figure 22.2 Variable costs of a fi  rm
Total cost
Total cost (TC) refers to the sum of all fi  xed and variable costs of production. The 
total cost line, shown in Figure 22.3, starts at the same value as fi  xed costs because even when nothing is produced, fi  xed costs still have to be paid by the fi  rm.
Total cost = ﬁ  xed costs + variable costs
Output level4000Fixed costs
OCost ($)Total costs
▲ Figure 22.3 Total costs for a fi  rm
Average fi  xed cost
Average fi  xed cost (AFC) is the fi  xed cost per unit. As a fi  rm produces more output, its fi  xed costs are divided by a greater quantity (of output), so AFC continually declines (see Figure 22.4). It is calculated using the formula:
Average ﬁ  xed cost = ﬁ  xed cost ÷ output level
Output levelAverage ﬁxed cost
OCost ($)
▲ Figure 22.4 Average fi  xed cost
Deﬁ  nitions
Total cost is the sum of all 
fi  xed and variable costs of production.Average ﬁ  xed cost refers to a fi  rm’s fi  xed cost per unit of output.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   156 24/01/18   11:23 AMHow changes in output affect costs of production
157Average variable cost
Average variable cost (AVC) is the variable cost of production per unit of output. 
It is calculated by dividing variable cost by the number of units produced. The shape of the AVC curve is similar to that shown in Figure 22.5, where economies of scale (see Chapter 20) allow the fi  rm to enjoy falling AVC. The onset of diseconomies of scale will increase a fi  rm’s AVC as it overproduces.
Average variable cost = variable cost ÷ output level
Average total cost
Average total cost (ATC), also known as the cost per unit, refers to the total cost of making one product — it is the unit cost of production. The diagrammatic representation of ATC is shown in Figure 22.5. The formula to calculate ATC is:
Average total cost = total cost ÷ output level
How changes in output affect costs of 
production
Firms that operate on a large scale are able to reduce their average cost of 
production (see Chapter 20). For example, Coca-Cola’s bottling plants can produce 2000 cans of soft drink per minute. This enables Coca-Cola to benefi  t from lower ATC (unit costs) as shown in Figure 22.5. The diagram shows that the fi  rm is able to enjoy economies of scale (lower average costs) as it expands output from Oa  to 
Ob. However, if the fi  rm becomes too large, by operating beyond Ob , it will suffer 
from ineffi  ciencies, thus leading to diseconomies of scale (see Chapter 20).
Activities
1 The table below shows a fi  rm’s fi  xed and variable costs of production at different 
levels of output. Calculate the level of output where average cost is at its lowest.
Output (units) Fixed costs ($) Variable costs ($)
20 300 40
30 300 75
40 300 120
50 300 250
2 Juke Engineering produces batteries for a major car maker. Juke’s monthly cost 
structure is shown in the table below. Assume that the fi  rm’s average variable costs 
of production remain constant at all the levels of output shown.
Output level (batteries) Total cost ($)
1000 50,000
2000 80,000
3000 110,000
a Calculate the average variable cost of production for Juke Engineering.b Calculate the value of Juke Engineering’s monthly total fi  xed cost.c Calculate the change in Juke Engineering’s average cost of production if it 
increases production from 1000 batteries per month to 3000 batteries per month.
Activities
1
 The table below shows a fi  rm’s fi  xed and variable costs of production at different 
levels of output. Calculate the level of output where average cost is at its lowest.
Deﬁ  nitions
Average variable cost 
refers to the variable cost per unit of output.Average total cost is the cost per unit of output, i.e. the total cost of making one product.
Output levelAverage total cost
OCost ($)
a b
▲ Figure 22.5 Average total cost of a fi  rm
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   157 24/01/18   11:23 AM22	 FirMs’	costs,	reVenue	and	obJectiVes
158Revenue
Revenue refers to the money payable to a business from the sale of its products. 
For example, Nike and Adidas receive most of their revenue from the sale of sports apparel and sports equipment. According to its website, McDonald’s, the world’s largest restaurant chain with over 37,000 restaurants worldwide, earns around $25 billion of revenue a year from the sale of fast food. The higher the volume of sales, the higher the fi  rm’s revenue will be.
Calculation of revenue
Total revenue (TR) refers to the aggregate amount of money a fi  rm receives from selling goods and services. It is calculated by using the formula:
Total revenue = price × quantity sold
For example, if a cinema charges an average price of $10 for a movie and manages to sell 5500 tickets in a week, its total revenue will be $55,000 (that is, $10 × 5500).
Average revenue (AR) refers to the typical price received from the sale of a 
good or service. It is calculated using the formula:
Average revenue = total revenue ÷ quantity sold
So, if instead the cinema earns $60,000 from the sale of 7500 tickets, the average revenue (or average price) will be $60,000 ÷ 7500 = $8 per ticket.
Objectives of fi  rms
Objectives are the goals or targets of an organisation, such as business survival, social welfare, growth and profi  t maximisation.
» Survival — while business survival is a vital objective for new businesses, even well-established fi  rms will need to focus on this, especially during unfavourable trading times. To survive in the long run, fi  rms need to be profi  table.
» Social welfare — this refers to business activity with concerns for the quality of life of those in society. Such objectives focus on what is considered to be socially responsible. They include having ethical objectives and using moral principles (values and beliefs) to guide business activity. Socially responsible businesses strive to improve the treatment of workers, customers, shareholders and the natural environment. For example, charities aim to provide services to enhance the welfare of others in society. 
   Pursuing social welfare as a business objective can help to improve how 
the general public perceives the organisation. A bad image can turn suppliers and customers against the fi  rm’s products and services. For example, US car maker Ford recalled over 500,000 cars worldwide in 2017 due to engine fi  res and faulty door latches. Resolving such problems, although costly to Ford, can prevent problems for the fi  rm in the long run.
» Growth — this objective refers to increasing the size of a business. It usually 
means aiming to increase the fi  rm’s sales revenues and its market share (its proportion of the industry’s total sales revenue). An increase in sales revenue will, other things being equal, lead to greater market share for the fi  rm. Growth has several advantages, such as customer loyalty and economies of scale (see Chapter 20).
▲ McDonald’s has over 37,000 
restaurants worldwide and earns around $25 billion of revenue a year. This is a branch in Tokyo, Japan
Deﬁ  nition
Total revenue is the amount payable to a fi  rm from the sale of its goods and services. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   158 24/01/18   11:23 AMObjectives of firms
159» Profi  t and profi  t maximisation — a fi  rm earns profi  t  if its total revenue 
exceeds its total cost of production. Profi  t is calculated by using the formula:
Proﬁ  t = total revenue − total costs
 Profi  t provides an incentive for entrepreneurs to take risks. Without profi  t, fi  rms 
will struggle to survive in the long run.
▲ ExxonMobil, the world’s largest oil company, earns annual profi  ts in excess of $41 billion
Activities
1 Carol’s Candles has fi  xed costs of $4000 each month. Its average variable cost is 
$3 per candle. The fi  rm’s current level of demand is 2500 candles per month. The 
average price of its candles is $6.a Using an example, explain what is meant by a fi  xed cost of production.b Calculate the fi  rm’s total cost of production each month.c Calculate the average total cost per month for Carol’s Candles.d Calculate the profi  t if demand increases to 3000 candles per month.
2 Complete the information below for a fi  rm that sells pizzas.
Units sold 
(pizzas per week)Sales revenue ($)Total ﬁ  xedcosts ($)Total variablecosts ($)Totalcost ($)Proﬁ  t orloss ($)
0 0 −4,000
400 4,000 8,000
800 4,000
1,200 18,000
Activities
1
 Carol’s Candles has fi  xed costs of $4000 each month. Its average variable cost is 
$3 per candle. The fi  rm’s current level of demand is 2500 candles per month. The 
Study tip
Students often use 
the terms ‘cost’ and ‘revenue’ interchangeably, although the terms have different meanings. Firms always pay the ‘cost’ (of production), whereas customers always pay the ‘price’. To make a profi  t, a product’s price must exceed its cost.
Deﬁ  nition
Proﬁ  t is the positive difference between a fi  rm’s total revenue and its total cost of production, i.e. profi  t = TR – TC .
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   159 24/01/18   11:23 AM22	 FirMs’	costs,	reVenue	and	obJectiVes
160
3 The following data refer to the costs and revenues of Mintjens Curtains Ltd when 
operating at 300 units of output per month.
Item Cost or revenue ($)
Price 50
Raw materials per unit 15
Advertising costs 200
Rent 3,500
Salaries 3,000
a Explain why advertising costs are an example of a fi  xed cost of production for 
Mintjens Curtains Ltd.
b Calculate Mintjens Curtains Ltd’s monthly total fi  xed costs of production.
c Calculate Mintjens Curtains Ltd’s total cost of producing 300 units per month.d Calculate the profi  t made by Mintjens Curtains Ltd if it sell all its output.
Profi  t maximisation is the main goal of most private sector fi  rms. Profi  t is 
maximised when the positive difference between a fi  rm’s sales revenue and its cost of production is at its greatest.
Activity
The table below shows the total cost of a fi  rm.
a Calculate the total revenue at each level of output if the selling price is $5.
Output (units) 20 30 40 50
Total cost ($) 120 150 190 230
Total revenue ($)
b From the above calculations, identify the number of units that the fi  rm should 
produce in order to maximise profi  ts.
Activity
The table below shows the total cost of a fi  rm.
Exam-style question
On Valentine’s Day 2013, American Airlines and US Airways merged to create 
the world’s largest airline in a deal worth $11 billion. Critics of the merger were concerned that with less competition, the US airline industry would have fewer incentives to keep prices at a competitive level. Others believed that the intensity of competition between Delta Air Lines and United Airlines would simply force American Airlines to offer better customer service for passengers. Today, American Airlines offers around 6700 daily fl  ights to nearly 350 destinations, and has annual revenue of around $40 billion.
a Defi  ne revenue. [2]
b Discuss whether the merger between American Airlines and US Airways 
would lead to lower costs and higher profi  t for the fi  rm. [8]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   160 24/01/18   11:23 AMObjectives of firms
161
Activity
Investigate the objectives of any two organisations of your choice. Compare and contrast 
your fi  ndings and be prepared to share them with the rest of the class.
Activity
Investigate the objectives of any two organisations of your choice. Compare and contrast 
your fi  ndings and be prepared to share them with the rest of the class.
Chapter review questions
 1 What is meant by cost of production?
 2 What is the difference between total, average, fi  xed and variable costs of production?
 3 How might the average cost of production change when the level of output changes?
 4 What is the difference between total and average revenue?
 5 What are the objectives (goals) that businesses might have?
 6 How is profi  t calculated?
 7 Why is survival an important goal for fi  rms?
 8 What is profi  t maximisation?
 9 Why do most fi  rms aim for growth?
10 Why do some fi  rms have social welfare as a goal?
Revision checklist
✔ Costs of production are the payments made by ﬁ  rms in the production 
process, such as salaries, advertising expenditure and taxes.
✔ Fixed costs are the costs of production that a ﬁ  rm has to pay irrespective 
of its output level, such as rent and insurance costs.
✔ Variable costs are costs of production that change when the level of 
output changes, such as raw material costs and utility bills.
✔ Total cost is the sum of all ﬁ  xed and variable costs of production: 
TC = FC + VC.
✔ Average ﬁ  xed cost (AFC) is a ﬁ  rm’s ﬁ  xed cost per unit of output, which 
continually declines as output increases.
✔ Average variable cost (AVC) is a ﬁ  rm’s variable cost per unit of output. It 
falls when the ﬁ  rm experiences economies of scale — for example, due 
to discounts for bulk purchases of raw materials.
✔ Average total cost (ATC) is the cost per unit of output — that is, the total 
cost of making one product.
✔ Revenue is the money payable to a business from the sale of its goods 
and services.
✔ Total revenue (TR) is the aggregate sum of money a ﬁ  rm receives from 
selling goods and services: TR = P × Q.
✔ Average revenue (AR) refers to the typical price received from the sale of 
a good or service: AR = TR ÷ Q.
✔ Objectives (goals) of ﬁ  rms include: survival, social welfare, growth and 
proﬁ  t maximisation.
✔ Proﬁ  t maximisation is the main goal of most private sector ﬁ  rms.
 Costs of production are the payments made by ﬁ  rms in the production 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   161 24/01/18   11:23 AM162
 23  Market structure
Competitive markets
In economics, the term market structure refers to the key characteristics of a 
particular market. These features include:
» the number and size of fi  rms in the market
» the degree and intensity of price and non-price competition
» the nature of barriers to entry.
The two extreme market structures in economics are highly competitive markets and monopoly.
Competitive markets are those with an immense degree of competition. A real 
world example is the wet markets (fresh food markets) commonly found in Asian countries such as Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Macau.
▲ A wet market in Hong Kong — an example of a competitive market
The main characteristics of fi  rms operating in competitive markets is that there are many fi  rms in the industry, none of which has any signifi  cant market power to infl  uence market demand or market supply (see Chapters 7 and 8). The presence of a large number of fi  rms in the industry has an impact on price, quality, choice and profi  t.
Deﬁ  nitions
Market structure refers 
to the key characteristics of a particular market (or industry), such as the number and size of fi  rms in the market, the degree and intensity of price and non-price competition, and the nature of barriers to entry.Barriers to entry are the obstacles that prevent fi  rms from entering a market. Examples are the existence of intellectual property rights, large advertising budgets of existing fi  rms and legal constraints to prevent wasteful competition.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand competitive markets
★ understand monopoly markets.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   162 24/01/18   11:23 AMCompetitive markets
163» Price — fi  rms in competitive markets are said to be price takers. This means 
that the price they charge is determined by the market forces of demand and supply rather than the fi  rms setting their own prices.
» Quality — in some highly competitive markets, fi  rms produce or sell homogeneous products. This means the products being sold are identical, such as bananas or strawberries being sold in fresh fruit markets. These fi  rms do not focus on quality as a form of product differentiation.
» Choice — in other competitive markets, fi  rms focus on producing differentiated products rather than homogeneous ones. For example, fi  rms may use branding, different product designs, colours and quality to differentiate their products. Many successful and large businesses develop memorable slogans (catchphrases) as a form of product differentiation in order to improve their competitiveness (see Table 23.1).
Table 23.1 Examples of business slogans
Slogan Business
Impossible is nothing Adidas
The ultimate driving machine BMW
Have it your way Burger King
The world’s online marketplace eBay
The world on time FedEx
The world’s local bank HSBC
Because I’m worth it L ’Oréal
I’m loving it McDonald’s
Just do it Nike
Ideas for life Panasonic
I don’t want to grow up Toys R Us
Always low prices Walmart
» Profi  t  — both buyers and sellers have easy access to information about the 
product and the prices being charged by competitors. In addition, as there are many rivals in the industry, profi  ts will be relatively low for each fi  rm in the market.
Overall, a high degree of competition in a market tends to benefi  t consumers. This is because they get higher-quality products and good customer service. In addition, competition brings about greater choice, higher output and more competitive prices (see Figure 23.1).
OPrice ($)
Quantity tradedP1S1 S2
P2
Q1Q2DIncreased competition shifts
the market supply curveoutwards from 
S1 to S2. 
This causes the market price to fallfrom 
P1 to P2, thereby causing
the quantity demanded toincrease from 
Q1 to Q2.
▲ Figure 23.1 Impact of competition on market price and output
Deﬁ  nition
Price takers are fi  rms that 
set their price according to the market price, rather than determining their own prices.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   163 24/01/18   11:23 AM23	 Market	structure
164Exam-style questions
Supermarket chains such as Walmart, Carrefour and Tesco use an extensive range 
of pricing and non-pricing strategies to compete. Market research published by Which? (a consumer campaigning organisation in the UK) showed that most shoppers believe supermarkets deliberately try to mislead them by using confusing pricing strategies. 
Which? found that supermarkets often use poor labelling and puzzling prices for 
their products. For instance, a 600g jar of mayonnaise might be priced at £3.49 while a 400g jar of the same brand is priced at £2.35 — so which one offers better value? Similarly, pre-packed fruit and vegetables were found to have very different prices compared to loose varieties of the same produce.
a Analyse whether supermarkets operate in a competitive market. [6]
b Discuss whether consumers benefi  t from the competitive strategies 
used by supermarkets. Give reasons for your answer. [8]
Monopoly markets
There are different defi  nitions of the term ‘monopoly’. In general, a monopoly is a market structure where one supplier dominates the market and has signifi  cant market power. Examples include Coca-Cola (carbonated soft drinks), YKK (zip fasteners) and Mabuchi (which makes around 90 per cent of the micro-motors used to adjust rear-view mirrors in cars). 
A pure monopoly exists if only one fi  rm 
supplies the whole market. In the USA, examples are the United States Postal Service (the only service provider of fi  rst-class postage) and the Federal Reserve (the sole supplier of US banknotes and coins). 
The word ‘monopoly’ comes from the Greek 
language, with monos meaning ‘one’ and polein meaning ‘to sell’.
In most industries, there are market leaders 
(those with a high market share) which have signifi  cant monopoly power to infl  uence the market supply and hence prices. An example is the tablet computer industry, which is dominated by Apple and Samsung. Hence, these fi  rms are price makers (or price setters) rather than price takers.
Characteristics of monopoly
Monopoly has the following characteristics:
» Single supplier — as its name suggests, a monopolist is the sole supplier of a product in a given market. This is due to the lack of substitute products caused by barriers to entry into the market.
Deﬁ  nition
Monopoly is a market 
structure where there is only one supplier of a good or service, with the power to affect market supply and prices.
Deﬁ  nition
Price makers are fi  rms that set their own price as they have the market power to do so, rather than having to base their price on the equilibrium price determined by the forces of demand and supply.
▲ Microsoft enjoyed a monopoly position in the software industry during the 1990s
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   164 24/01/18   11:23 AMMonopoly markets
165» Price maker — the monopolist has signifi  cant market power as it controls 
enough of the market supply (see Chapter 8) to be able to charge higher prices and yet produce lower output than would be the case if it faced competition.
» Imperfect knowledge — a monopolist is able to protect its prestigious position as customers and rivals have imperfect knowledge, partly as a result of the monopolist’s ability to protect its trade secrets.
» High barriers to entry — a monopolist can only remain so if in the long run there are very high barriers to entry. These obstacles effectively prevent other fi  rms from entering the market. Examples are: economies of scale of existing fi  rms, ownership of essential resources, the existence of intellectual property rights (patents, trademarks and copyrights), advertising expenditure and legal barriers to entry.
Case study: Prices through the roof
With a large degree of monopoly power, fi  rms are able to charge astronomical prices for 
some of their products. For example:
• The most expensive can of Coca-Cola, made for astronauts, is priced at $1250 
per can.
• The world’s fastest car, the Bugatti Chiron is priced at a cool $2.7 million, before 
taxes are applied.
• The most expensive Barbie doll, which comes with a 1-carat pink diamond, sold in 
2010 for a record price of $302,500.
• The world’s most expensive BBQ is the 24-carat gold-plated BeefEater Barbecue, for 
which you have to pay $165,000.
• At $25,000, the world’s most expensive dessert is a chocolate sundae sold with a 
golden spoon for customers to enjoy fl  akes of edible gold! They can keep the spoon, 
which is made by luxury jeweller Euphoria New York. 
In reality, barriers to entry exist in almost all markets. For example, there may be legal barriers to some industries, such as the professional qualifi  cations required to practise law and medicine, and high set-up costs preventing entry into other markets, such as the airline and pharmaceutical industries.
Study tip
It is incorrect to claim that 
monopolists can charge ‘whatever’ price they want because they are the single supplier of a good or service. While monopolists have the ability to control market supply, they cannot govern the level of market demand. Customers will switch to or seek alternatives if prices are too high. Hence, monopolists must lower prices if they want to sell more.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   165 24/01/18   11:23 AM23	 Market	structure
166
Activity 
Choose one of the products in the case study ‘Prices through the roof’. Discuss with a 
partner the reasons why certain customers would be willing to pay such a high price for one of these goods.
Activity 
Choose one of the products in the case study ‘Prices through the roof’. Discuss with a 
partner the reasons why certain customers would be willing to pay such a high price 
Exam-style questions
The advertising budgets of large fi  rms can act as a barrier to entry. America’s 
most watched sporting event, the annual Super Bowl, is a magnet for fi  rms with huge advertising budgets. In 2017 the average cost of a 30-second advert during the Super Bowl was $5 million! Marketers believe that the best Super Bowl adverts earn a permanent place in history, being broadcast on television and internet websites such as YouTube for years to come.
a Defi  ne the term barriers to entry. [2]
b Explain why advertising expenditure can act as a barrier to entry. [4]
Advantages of monopoly
The monopoly market structure has the following benefi  ts:
» As monopolists control market supply, they operate on a very large scale, thus 
benefi  ting from huge economies of scale (see Chapter 20) — that is, lower average costs of production as output increases. This means that monopolists can actually supply larger quantities of output and at lower prices. Such market power can be a source of international competitiveness against foreign competitors.
» Monopolists have the fi  nancial resources to invest in innovation. Research 
and development expenditure can help to generate new ideas, products and production processes. Innovation can therefore act as a source of profi  t and improve the productive capacity of the economy. For example, Apple’s innovative products such as the iPhone and iPad have made the company one of the most valuable businesses on the planet.
» Some monopolies can eliminate wasteful competition. For example, it makes 
economic sense to have one monopoly supplier of postal services in a town, state or country rather than allowing private sector fi  rms to compete to provide such services. This is because profi  t-seeking fi  rms may not have much of a fi  nancial incentive to provide services in remote areas of the country and a single provider can gain huge economies of scale. The same applies to suppliers of water pipes, railway tracks, telephone lines and electricity grids.
Disadvantages of monopoly
Monopoly has the following disadvantages:
» Private sector monopolies can be ineffi  cient in terms of resource allocation. In 
their pursuit of profi  t maximisation, monopolists can restrict the output of a product and/or charge a higher price for it. This creates a loss in the welfare of consumers.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   166 24/01/18   11:23 AMMonopoly markets
167» As there are no substitutes for the products supplied by monopolists, demand 
is price inelastic (see Chapter 11). As monopolists are price makers, they can 
charge higher prices to maximise profi  t from this relatively low PED.
» High barriers to entry prevent new fi  rms from setting up in the market. This 
limits the degree of competition and ensures monopolists can continue to charge relatively high prices.
» Imperfect knowledge about the prices and products being charged by 
competitors means that consumers may not necessarily make rational choices. For example, mobile phone network providers use very confusing pricing packages for their services. Similarly, banks offer a variety of interest rate charges for their various types of loans. Thus, imperfect knowledge enables monopolists to maintain market power.
» Monopolists may have less incentive to innovate than fi  rms in competitive 
markets. Innovation is the commercial exploitation of an invention. The lack of competitive pressures means that monopolists can become complacent (as there is no need to be worried about competition), rather than focusing on innovations to ensure their survival.
Note that if monopolies exploit their market power and act against the public interest, perhaps by deliberately charging unreasonably high prices, then the government can intervene. For example, a merger between the two largest fi  rms in a market can be prohibited by the government if there is a strong reason to believe that the monopolist’s resulting gain in market share will act against the interests of the general public. In 2013, Visa and MasterCard were fi  ned a record $7.25 billion for colluding to fi  x their credit card fees to retailers for processing credit card payments.
Activities
1 The top fi  ve suppliers in the sugar and tobacco industries account for about 
99 per cent of the market in the UK. Use the internet to research the industries 
which are most dominated by monopolists in your own country.
2 In small groups, discuss whether monopolies offer more or less choice for 
customers. Think of real-world examples to support your discussions. Is choice a good thing?
3 Discuss the information you would need in order to assess whether a particular 
monopolist benefi  ts consumers.
Activities
1
 The top fi  ve suppliers in the sugar and tobacco industries account for about 
99 per cent of the market in the UK. Use the internet to research the industries 
Exam-style questions
1 Which option is not a feature of monopoly? [1]
A Firms supply homogeneous goods
B Monopolists are price makersC Only one fi  rm in the industryD There are major barriers to entry into and exit from the industry
2 Which option is not a feature of competitive markets? [1]
A Firms supply differentiated goodsB Many small fi  rms exist in the industryC There are no barriers to entry into and exit from the industryD There is perfect knowledge of prices and production information
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   167 24/01/18   11:23 AM23	 Market	structure
1683 Which option is not a characteristic of monopoly as a market structure? [1]
A High market share
B Imperfect knowledgeC Low entry barriersD Price setter
4 What is an advantage of monopoly as a market structure? [1]
A Being able to charge lower pricesB Consumer sovereigntyC Having the fi  nancial resources for research and developmentD Wider choice and availability of products
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by market structure?
2 What are barriers to entry?3 What are the main characteristics of competitive markets?4 What are the effects of competitive markets on price, quality, choice and profi  t?5 What is meant by a monopoly?6 What are the main characteristics of a monopoly?7 What are the advantages of monopoly?8 What are the disadvantages of monopoly?
Revision checklist
✔ Market structure refers to the key characteristics of a particular market, 
in terms of: the number and size of ﬁ  rms in the market, the degree and 
intensity of price and non-price competition, and the nature of barriers to entry.
✔ Barriers to entry are the obstacles that prevent ﬁ  rms from entering the 
market.
✔ The two extreme market structures in economics are highly competitive 
markets and monopoly.
✔ Competitive markets are those with an immense degree of competition.
✔ Price takers are ﬁ  rms that set their price according to the market price, 
rather than determining their own prices.
✔ In general, a high degree of competition tends to beneﬁ  t consumers 
in terms of higher-quality products, better customer service, greater choice and more competitive prices.
✔ Monopoly is a market structure where there is only one supplier of a 
good or service, with the power to affect market supply and prices.
✔ Characteristics of monopoly include: a single supplier in the market, 
being a price maker, imperfect knowledge and high barriers to entry.
✔ Advantages of monopoly include: the potential to supply larger quantities 
and at lower prices, having the ﬁ  nancial resources for research and development, and the elimination of wasteful competition.
✔ Disadvantages of monopoly include: the potential to exploit customers 
through higher prices and limited supply, high entry barriers to limit competition, imperfect knowledge which can lead to irrational decision making, and a lack of innovation due to the absence of competition.
 Market structure refers to the key characteristics of a particular market, 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-03.indd   168 24/01/18   11:23 AM169
SECTION 4
Government 
and the macro economy
Chapters
24 The role of government
25 The macroeconomic aims of government26 Fiscal policy27 Monetary policy28 Supply-side policy29 Economic growth30 Employment and unemployment31 Inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation
Governments are an essential part of the macro 
economy. This section of the syllabus looks at the role of the government, at a local, national and international level. Governments have ﬁ  ve macroeconomic aims: namely to achieve economic growth, full employment/low unemployment, stable prices/low inﬂ  ation, balance of payments stability and a fairer distribution of income. However, these aims often conﬂ  ict with each other . Hence, Section 4 of the syllabus looks at the criteria that governments use when deciding their aims. In order to achieve their aims, governments use a range of macroeconomic policies, including ﬁ  scal policy, monetary policy and supply-side policies.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   169 14/02/18   8:32 AM170
 24  The role of government
The role of government
The general role of the government is to improve the general welfare of its 
people. The government collects tax revenues in order to fund its expenditure on essential services, such as healthcare, infrastructure and national security.
The government can operate at three levels: local, national and 
international.
Local role
The central or federal government collects taxes which it uses to fund local 
services such as rubbish collection (public refuse collection), street lighting, libraries, schools, hospitals and public parks. Central government gives local government funding to spend on these public and merit goods (see Chapter 14) in the local area.
▲ Refuse collection is a service funded by government at the local level
National role 
The central government makes decisions about how to achieve its 
macroeconomic aims (see Chapter 25): economic growth, stable price levels, low unemployment, a healthy balance of payments and redistribution of By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand the role of government (locally, nationally and 
internationally).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   170 24/01/18   11:18 AMThe role of government
171income and wealth. It does this by seeking to use appropriate macroeconomic 
policies (see Chapters 26–28). For example, the national government may make decisions on the following policy areas:
» Fiscal policy — the government needs to decide how to raise money 
through taxation and other sources, and how much of its annual budget to spend on welfare, education, healthcare, defence and other items (see Chapter 26).
» Monetary policy — the government may instruct the central bank or monetary authority to make decisions about interest rates and the money supply in order to infl  uence economic activity (see Chapter 27).
» Supply-side policies — the government might choose to change the level of the minimum wage. It might create a Competition Commission to regulate the actions of fi  rms (to ensure they are not anti-competitive). These policies are designed to promote economic growth through increasing the productive capacity of the economy (see Chapter 28).
» Policies to protect the environment — see the case study on the Paris Agreement below.
International role 
The role of government also involves an international dimension as modern economies need to trade with other countries. An economy may be part of a trading bloc, such as the European Union, which promotes free trade and mobility of factors of production between member countries. There will be some countries with which the country does not have free trade, so tariffs and quotas may be imposed on goods traded (see Chapter 37). For example, the USA places a tariff (import tax) on tyres and solar panels imported from China.
Case study: The Paris Agreement
A national government may enter into an agreement with other countries to achieve a 
common goal. For example, in 2016 a total of 197 countries signed the Paris Agreement, which is designed to limit climate change. All the countries involved agreed to the aim of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. International decisions like this will have an impact on the actions of domestic fi  rms. 
Source: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Study tip
To get a better 
understanding of the role of the government, read the following sections of the book:
• Local and national level: 
Chapter 14 (Market 
failure).
• National level: Chapter 25
(The macroeconomic aims of government) and Chapter 30 (Employment and unemployment).
Activity
Discuss the extent to which international agreements such as the Paris Agreement can 
actually achieve a common goal such as environmental protection.
Activity
Discuss the extent to which international agreements such as the Paris Agreement can 
actually achieve a common goal such as environmental protection.
Case study: Sustainable Development Goals
Another international agreement among governments concerns the Sustainable Development Goals created by the United Nations in 2015. These are 17 goals designed to ‘end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure prosperity for all’. Each goal has specifi  c targets which are to be met by 2030.
Source: United Nations 
Deﬁ  nition
A trading bloc is a 
free trade area which also promotes the free movement of factors of production between member countries.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   171 24/01/18   11:18 AM24	 The	role	of	governmenT
172
Activity
Go to the United Nation’s Development Programme (UNDP) website and research the 
SDG. Choose a single goal that you feel is the most important. With a partner (who has, preferably, chosen a different top goal), discuss the reasons for your choice.
Activity
Go to the United Nation’s Development Programme (UNDP) website and research the 
SDG. Choose a single goal that you feel is the most important. With a partner (who has, 
Exam-style questions
1 What is the general role of a government? [1]
A To allocate scarce resource
B To improve the general welfare of its peopleC To provide infrastructure such as roadsD To provide welfare benefi  ts to low income households 
2 What does the national government not make decisions on?  [1]
A Fiscal policy measuresB Funding of libraries leisure (health) centresC Monetary policy proceduresD Level of infrastructure 
3 Which level of government makes decisions about how best to achieve its 
macroeconomic aims?  [1]
A LocalB InternationalC MultinationalD National
4 Which option is most applicable to the role of international governments?  [1]
A Financial support for local libraries and health centresB The formation of a regional trading blocC The funding of national defence programmesD The imposition of tariffs and quotas
Chapter review questions
1 What is the general role of a government?
2 What are some examples of the role of local government?
3 What are some examples of the decisions made by government at a national level?
4 What is the role of government at an international level?
5 What is a trading bloc?
Revision checklist
✔ The principal role of the government is to improve the general welfare of 
its people.
✔ The government collects taxes in order to fund its expenditure on 
essential services.
✔ The government operates at three levels: local, national and international.
✔ The national government may make decisions on ﬁ  scal policies, 
monetary policies and supply-side policies in order to achieve its 
macroeconomic aims.
✔ It also uses policy measures, such as the Paris Agreement, to protect the 
environment.
 The principal role of the government is to improve the general welfare of 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   172 24/01/18   11:18 AM173
 25  The macroeconomic aims
of government
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ outline the macroeconomic aims of government
★ explain the reasons behind the choice of aims and the criteria that 
governments set for each aim
★ discuss the possible conﬂ  icts between macroeconomic aims.
The macroeconomic aims of government
Governments usually have fi  ve macroeconomic aims that they strive to achieve: 
economic growth, full employment or low unemployment, stable prices or low infl  ation, balance of payments stability, and redistribution of income and wealth (in order to achieve greater equality).
Economic growth
Economic growth refers to an increase in a country’s real gross domestic product (GDP) over time. Economists believe that sustained economic growth is an important macroeconomic aim because it is the most practical measure of standards of living in a country. Economic growth represents a long-term expansion in the productive capacity of the economy. 
Diagrammatically, economic growth can be shown by an outward shift of the 
production possibility curve (PPC ). In Figure 25.1, a combination of an increase 
in the quantity and quality of factors of production shifts the PPC outwards from PPC
1 to PPC 2, creating more producer and consumer goods, shown by the 
movement from A to B. By contrast, negative economic growth results in a recession in the business cycle (see Chapter 29).
OPPC1PPC2Producer goods
Consumer goodsAB
▲ Figure 25.1 Economic growth and the PPC
Full employment/low unemployment
Unemployment occurs when people are willing and able to work, and actively seeking employment, but are unable to fi  nd work. Low unemployment is a key macroeconomic aim because it complements economic growth — higher employment tends to lead to greater GDP. Hence, low unemployment tends to increase the standards of living in an economy. In addition, full employment or low unemployment represents greater effi  ciency in the use of the economy’s resources.
Deﬁ  nition
Economic growth is the 
annual increase in the level of national output, i.e. the annual percentage change in gross domestic product.
Deﬁ  nition
Unemployment occurs when people are willing and able to work, and actively seeking employment, but are unable to fi  nd work. Low unemployment is a key macroeconomic aim.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   173 24/01/18   11:18 AM25	 The	macroeconomic	aimsof	governmenT	
174
▲ The unemployed lack income to spend
The unemployment rate calculates the percentage of the labour force that is 
unemployed. It is measured using the formula:
Number of unemployed people
Number in the labour force × 100
For example, in a country with a workforce of 50 million people, of which 5 million are of working age and actively seeking employment but cannot fi  nd work, the unemployment rate equals (5m ÷ 50m) × 100 = 10%.
Exam-style question
Using the data below, calculate the total number of people unemployed in the economy. [2]
Labour force 30m
Population of working age 35m
Unemployment rate 8%
Stable prices/low infl  ation
Infl  ation is the sustained rise in the general price level in an economy. This does not mean that the price of every good and service is increasing, but that on average prices are rising. Governments set a target infl  ation rate as a key macroeconomic aim in order to control economic activity. Infl  ation is typically measured by using a Consumer Price Index (CPI). This weighted index measures the change in prices of a representative basket of goods and services consumed by the average household in the economy (see Chapter 31).
 Deﬁ  nition
Infl  ation is the sustained 
rise in the general price level in an economy. Most governments set a target infl  ation rate in order to control economic activity.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   174 24/01/18   11:18 AM175The macroeconomic aims of government
Exam-style questions
The data below show the infl  ation rates for a country over three years.
Year 1 2 3
Infl  ation rate (%) 2.5 1.7 2.3
a Defi  ne the meaning of ‘infl  ation rate’. [2]
b Explain why prices were at their highest level in the third year. [4]
Balance of payments stability
The balance of payments is a fi  nancial record of a country’s transactions with the 
rest of the world for a given time period, usually one year. This includes the country’s trade in goods and services with other countries. The government records credit items (all payments received from other countries) and debit items (all payments made to other nations) in its balance of payments. For example, the expenditure by French tourists visiting the UK would be recorded as a credit item on the UK’s balance of payments. In theory, the balance of payments must always balance over time because a country, like an individual, can only spend what it earns.
In general, a large and persistent balance of payments defi  cit (see Chapter 39) 
suggests that the country is uncompetitive in international markets. This can have detrimental consequences for the domestic economy, such as job losses. Thus, a defi  cit on the balance of payments will have a negative impact on economic growth and standards of living.
Redistribution of income
Governments aim to achieve greater equality through the redistribution of income. A report by Oxfam and Forbes in 2017 suggested that the world’s eight richest people had as much wealth as the poorest 3.6 billion of the world’s population (see Table 25.1).
Table 25.1 The world’s richest billionaires, March 2016
Ranking Billionaire Wealth (US$)
1 Bill Gates 75
2 Amancio Ortega 67
3 Warren Buffett 61
4 Carlos Slim 50
5 Jeff Bezos 45
6 Mark Zuckerberg 45
7 Larry Ellison 44
8 Michael Bloomberg 40
Economies face unequitable distribution of income due to the naturally unequal ownership of factors of production in a free market economy. For example, consider the wage differentials between professional footballers, doctors and pilots, on the one hand, and those earning the national minimum wage, on the other.
Deﬁ  nition
The balance of payments 
is a fi  nancial record of a country’s transactions with the rest of the world for a given time period, usually one year.
Deﬁ  nition
Redistribution of income refers to the macroeconomic aim of achieving greater equality in the distribution of income in an economy.Study tip
Some students tend to think 
that infl  ation is bad for the economy. However, low rates of infl  ation, of 1 or 2 per cent, are not usually harmful to the economy because higher prices can encourage fi  rms to supply more output. It is only when infl  ation rises too quickly that it can become a problem.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   175 24/01/18   11:18 AM25	 The 	macroeconomic 	aimsof 	governmen T	
176A major role of taxation is to redistribute income to help the relatively 
less well-off in society. For example, progressive taxation charges a higher 
percentage tax as an individual’s income rises — in other words, those who earn more pay a greater proportion of their income in tax (see Chapter 26). Other ways to redistribute income include the use of subsidies and welfare benefits, such as old age pensions and unemployment benefits.
Possible conflicts between 
macroeconomic aims
It is not usually possible for a government to achieve all of its five 
macroeconomic goals at once. This is because there are a number of conflicts between these macroeconomic aims, which leave governments with a trade-off. Ultimately, the government has to decide which macroeconomic aim is the most important to the economy at a particular time. 
The potential conflicts between macroeconomic aims are described below.
Full employment versus stable prices
When the economy expands and more people are in employment, it is likely that inflationary pressures will occur. People will have more money to spend as the economy reaches full employment, and demand-pull inflation (see Chapter 31) may occur because demand in the economy increases faster than supply. Cost-push inflation  
can also occur because full employment makes it harder for firms to attract skilled labour, and this can lead to wage inflation (and hence higher prices in general).
Economic growth versus balance of payments stability
If economic growth is caused by higher consumption expenditure (consumer spending), it may cause a deficit in the country’s balance of payments (see Chapter 39). This is because as consumption rises, there tends to be an increase in expenditure on imports. This is particularly the case if economic growth has caused an increase in inflation, making the country’s exports less price competitive.
Full employment versus balance of payments stability
As the employment level increases, people become wealthier and tend to buy more imports. Hence, this can lead to balance of payments problems. In addition, wages tend to rise as an economy reaches the level of national income at which there is full employment. This will contribute to cost-push inflation, making the country’s exports less competitive. Therefore, full employment is likely to worsen the country’s balance of payments.
Economic growth versus stable prices
A cut in interest rates or an increase in the money supply in order to stimulate economic growth can conflict with other macroeconomic objectives, such as inflation (price stability). A cut in interest rates enables those with existing loans and mortgages to have more income at their disposal to spend. It also means that borrowing is cheaper, so firms can raise their investment expenditure. However, the combination of higher consumption and investment in the economy can cause demand-pull inflation.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   176 24/01/18   11:18 AMPossible conflicts between macroeconomic aims
177Exam-style questions
1 What is infl  ation?  [1]
A A fall in the general price level, over a given period of time
B A sustained increase in the general price level, over a given period of timeC A sustained increase in the level of national incomeD An increase in the rate of interest
2 Which option is the least likely economic consequence of high unemployment? [1]
A A fall in the level of consumption due to lower earningsB A fall in the level of national incomeC Higher government expenditure on welfare benefi  tsD An increase in the rate of infl  ation
3 Which option is least likely to cause economic growth?  [1]
A An increase in wagesB Greater investment expenditureC Higher general price levelD Higher level of consumption
 
Chapter review questions
1 What are the fi  ve macroeconomic aims of government?
2 What is meant by economic growth and how is it measured?3 What is meant by unemployment and how is it measured?4 What is meant by infl  ation and how is it measured?5 What is the balance of payments?6 How do credit and debit items differ on the balance of payments?7 Why do countries try to avoid a persistent defi  cit on their balance of payments?8 Why do governments aim to redistribute income?9 How might there be confl  icts between macroeconomic aims?
Revision checklist
✔ Governments try to achieve ﬁ  ve macroeconomic aims: economic growth, 
full employment or low unemployment, stable prices or low inﬂ  ation, 
balance of payments stability, and redistribution of income and wealth.
✔ Economic growth refers to an increase in a country’s real gross domestic 
product (GDP) over time. It is shown by an outward shift of the production possibility curve. The government aims to achieve economic growth as it tends to raise standards of living for the majority of the population.
✔ Unemployment occurs when people are willing and able to work, and 
actively seeking employment, but are unable to ﬁ  nd work.
✔ Inﬂ  ation is the sustained rise in the general price level in an economy. It 
is calculated using a weighted price index, which measures the change in prices of a representative basket of goods and services consumed by the average household.
✔ The balance of payments is a ﬁ  nancial record of a country’s transactions 
with the rest of the world for a given time period.
✔ Governments aim to achieve greater equality in the distribution of income.
✔ It is not usually possible for a government to achieve all of its 
macroeconomic aims at once because there are a number of conﬂ  icts between these goals.
 Governments try to achieve ﬁ  ve macroeconomic aims: economic growth, 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   177 24/01/18   11:18 AM178
 26  Fiscal policy
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne the budget
★ explain the reasons for government spending
★ explain the reasons for taxation
★ understand the various classiﬁ  cations of taxes
★ understand the principles of taxation
★ examine the impact of taxation on various stakeholders
★ deﬁ  ne ﬁ  scal policy
★ understand ﬁ  scal policy measures
★ discuss the effects of ﬁ  scal policy on macroeconomic aims.
The government budget
The government budget refers to the government’s fi  nancial plans in terms of 
planned revenues and expenditure. There are other sources of government revenue (such as government borrowing or privatisation proceeds from the selling of state 
assets) but tax revenues are by far the most signifi  cant source.
Tax revenues
Income tax
Corporation taxInheritance taxSales taxImport taxes
Non-tax revenuesFines, tolls, fees and penalties
Foreign aidLoans from banksRevenue from state-owned enterprisesDonationsGovernment spending
Communications
Debt interestDefenceEducationEnvironmentHealthcareHousingLaw and orderPostal servicesRoads and motorwaysSewage systemsTransport
Welfare beneﬁts
▲ Figure 26.1 Tax revenues and government spending
If the government manages to balance its revenues and its spending, then a 
balanced budget is said to exist. However, if the government spends more than it collects from its revenues then a budget defi  cit exists. Finally, if there is more government revenue than is spent, the government has a budget surplus.
In the long run, governments strive to balance their budgets. This is partly 
because increasing government revenues by raising taxes is highly unpopular, while government borrowing to fund a budget defi  cit is hugely expensive due to the amount of interest owed on such loans.
Exam-style questions
Suppose the government’s revenues total £865 billion and its expenditure is £897 billion.
a Defi  ne the term budget deﬁ  cit. [2]
b Calculate the value of the country’s budget defi  cit in this case. [2]
Deﬁ  nition
The government budget 
refers to its fi  nancial plans in terms of planned revenues (mainly tax revenues) and expenditure (such as healthcare, education and welfare payments).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   178 24/01/18   11:18 AM179Reasons for taxation
Reasons for government spending
Essential services, such as state education, housing, healthcare and postal 
services, are provided by the public sector (see Figure 26.1). The government also exists to redistribute income and wealth, such as by providing welfare benefi  ts and state pensions. The government may also intervene to correct market failures (see Chapter 14), such as by providing subsidies to create incentives to invest in green technologies.
Activity 
Investigate the latest government budget in your country or a country of your choice. 
Evaluate its strengths and weaknesses and the impact on various economic agents, such as:
• fi  xed-income earners
• the elderly
• families
• businesses
• home-owners.
Activity 
Investigate the latest government budget in your country or a country of your choice. 
Evaluate its strengths and weaknesses and the impact on various economic agents, 
Reasons for taxation
To fund government expenditure, the government tends to rely on tax revenues 
(see Figure 26.1). A tax is a government levy on income or expenditure. In addition to funding its spending, there are other reasons why the government imposes taxes. For example:
» Taxes on salaries and profi  ts raise government revenue to help redistribute 
income and wealth in the economy.
» Taxes on goods and services raise the costs of production and therefore can 
limit the output of certain demerit products (see Chapter 14), such as alcohol and tobacco.
» Tariffs imposed on foreign goods and services help to protect domestic fi  rms 
from overseas rivals (see Chapter 37).
Before the government can spend money on the economy, it must fi  rst take the money from taxpayers (both individuals and fi  rms). In addition to other sources of government fi  nance (such as loans and donations), tax revenues are spent on several key areas including: social security, education, healthcare, transport, infrastructure and national defence.
▲ National defence is a large item of government spending
Deﬁ  nition
A tax  is a government levy 
on income or expenditure.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   179 24/01/18   11:18 AM26	 fiscal	policy
180The tax burden refers to the amount of tax that households and firms have 
to pay. This can be measured in three ways. For a country, the tax burden is 
measured by calculating total tax revenues as a proportion of gross domestic product (GDP). For individuals and firms, the tax burden can be measured by the absolute value of tax paid or by the amount of tax paid as a proportion of their income or profits.
Activity 
At the end of 2012, economists described the situation faced by the US government 
as a ‘fi  scal cliff’. Investigate what this means and its potential impact on the economy in the short run and the long run. Be prepared to show your investigation to others in the class.
Activity 
At the end of 2012, economists described the situation faced by the US government 
as a ‘fi  scal cliff’. Investigate what this means and its potential impact on the economy 
Classification of taxes
Some of the main taxes are explained in Table 26.1.
Table 26.1 Examples of taxes
Tax Deﬁ  nition
Income tax A direct tax levied on personal incomes — wages, interest, rent and 
dividends. In most countries, this is the main source of tax revenues
Corporation tax A direct tax on the profi  ts of businesses
Sales tax An indirect tax, such as VAT, charged on an individual’s spendingExcise duties Indirect inland taxes imposed on certain goods and services such as 
alcohol, tobacco, petrol, soft drinks and gambling
Customs duties Indirect cross-border taxes on foreign importsCapital gains tax A direct tax on the earnings made from investments such as buying shares 
and private property
Inheritance tax A direct tax on the transfer of income and wealth such as property when 
passed on to another person
Stamp duty A progressive tax paid on the sale of commercial or residential propertyCarbon tax A tax imposed on vehicle manufacturers or fi  rms that produce excessive 
carbon emissions
Windfall tax A tax charged on individuals and fi  rms that gain an unexpected one-off 
amount of money, such as a person winning the lottery or a fi  rm gaining 
from a takeover bid
There are various classifi  cations of taxes, as explained below.
Direct and indirect taxation
Taxes can be classifi  ed into direct and indirect taxation:
» Direct taxation — this type of tax is paid from the income, wealth or profi  t of 
individuals and fi  rms. Examples are taxes on salaries, inheritance and company profi  ts.
» Indirect taxation — these are expenditure taxes imposed on spending on goods and services. For example, countries such as Australia and Singapore use a ‘goods and services tax’ (GST), whereas the European Union uses value added tax (VAT). Other examples are taxes on petrol, alcohol and cigarettes.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   180 24/01/18   11:18 AMClassification of taxes
181Exam-style questions
Countries such as Saudi Arabia, Gibraltar and Hong Kong do not have a sales 
tax — a type of indirect tax.
a Defi  ne the term indirect tax. [2]
b Analyse the advantages and disadvantages for countries that do not 
impose sales taxes. [6]
Activity 
Copy the table below. Place a tick in the correct section of the table to identify whether 
the tax is direct or indirect. The fi  rst one has been completed as an example.
Tax Direct Indirect
Airport tax ✔
Capital gains tax
Carbon tax 
Corporation tax
Customs duties
Excise duties
Income tax
Inheritance tax
Stamp duty
Tariffs
VAT or GST
Windfall tax
Activity 
Copy the table below. Place a tick in the correct section of the table to identify whether 
the tax is direct or indirect. The fi  rst one has been completed as an example.
Progressive, regressive and proportional taxation
Taxes can also be classifi  ed according to whether they are progressive, regressive 
or proportional.
Progressive taxation
Under this tax system, those with a higher ability to pay are charged a higher rate of tax. This means that as the income, wealth or profi  t of the taxpayer rises, a higher rate of tax is imposed (see Figure 26.2). Examples of progressive taxes are income tax, capital gains tax and stamp duty (see Table 26.1).
OTax rate (%)
Income levelT2
T1
Y1 Y2As the level of income
increases from Y1 to Y2,
the rate of tax rises from
T1 to T2
▲ Figure 26.2 Progressive taxesStudy tip
It is incorrect to defi  ne a 
progressive tax system as one in which the rich pay more tax than the poor. This would be the case even if there were a fl  at-rate income tax, for example — the amount paid by a higher income earner would be greater than the amount paid by a low income earner. What is important is the rate  (percentage) of 
tax paid.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   181 24/01/18   11:18 AM26	 fiscal	policy
182
Activity
Suppose in a country the progressive tax rates are 10 per cent (on incomes between 
$10,001 and $40,000 per year) and 15 per cent (on incomes over $40,000 per year).
a Copy the table below. By completing the table, calculate the total amount of tax paid 
by an individual who earns $75,000 per year.
Income level ($) Tax rate (%) Amount of tax paid ($)
10,000  0
10,001–40,000 10
40,001+ 15
Total tax:
b Show how the average rate of income tax paid by the individual is 11 per cent.
Activity
Suppose in a country the progressive tax rates are 10 per cent (on incomes between 
$10,001 and $40,000 per year) and 15 per cent (on incomes over $40,000 per year).
Regressive taxation 
Under this tax system, those with a higher ability to pay are actually charged a 
lower rate of tax — in other words, the wealthier the individual, the lower the tax paid as a percentage of the income level (see Figure 26.3). For example, although a high income earner pays the same amount of airport tax or television licence fee as a less wealthy person, the amount of tax paid is a smaller proportion of the wealthier person’s income.
OTax rate (%)
Income levelT1
T2
Y1 Y2With a speci/f_ic amount
of tax paid, high-incomeearners (those at Y
2) pay
a smaller proportion of ta x
(T2) than low-income
earners (those on Y1 who
pay T1)
▲ Figure 26.3 Regressive taxes
Proportional taxation 
Under this tax system, the percentage paid stays the same, irrespective of the 
taxpayer’s level of income, wealth or profi  ts (see Figure 26.4). An example is a sales tax, such as VAT or GST. For example, Denmark has a 25 per cent GST whereas sales taxes in India and Japan are as low as 5 per cent.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   182 24/01/18   11:18 AMPrinciples of taxation
183OTax rate (%)
Income level20
Y1 Y2Irrespective of the
income level (Y1 or Y2),
the same rate of tax ischarged, such as the20% VAT in Austria,Morocco, Senegal an
d
the UK
▲ Figure 26.4 Proportional taxes
Activities
1 Study the data below and answer the questions that follow.
Income ($ per year) Tax paid per year ($)
Tax A Tax B Tax C
10,000 1000 1000 1000
15,000 1000 1800 1500
20,000 1000 3000 2000
25,000 1000 4500 2500
a Identify the tax (A, B or C) that is progressive.
b Identify the tax (A, B or C) that is proportional.c Explain the difference between a regressive and a proportional tax.
2 Study the three tax systems below. Calculate the percentage of tax paid on each level 
of income in order to determine whether the tax systems are progressive, regressive or proportional.
Tax system A Tax system B Tax system C
Annual 
income ($)Amount of tax paid ($)Annual income ($)Amount of tax paid ($)Annual income ($)Amount of tax paid ($)
 4,500    900 10,000 1,500  8,000     800
10,000 1,800 20,000 3,000 20,000  3,000
20,000 2,800 30,000 4,500 45,000 11,250
Activities
1
Study the data below and answer the questions that follow.
Principles of taxation
The phrase ‘principles of taxation’ refers to the qualities of a good tax:
» Equitable (fair) — taxes should be based on the taxpayer’s ability to pay. This 
principle is used to justify progressive taxation, since the rich have a greater ability to pay than the poor do.
» Economical — the tax should be easy and cheap to collect in order to maximise the yield relative to the cost of collection.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   183 24/01/18   11:18 AM26	 fiscal	policy
184» Convenience — the method of payment should be convenient to the taxpayer 
(to encourage payment) — for example, on-line payments for tax returns.
» Certainty — the taxpayer should know what, when, where and how to pay the tax (to limit tax evasion).
» Effi  ciency — the tax system should attempt to achieve its aims without any undesirable side-effects. For example, higher tax rates could result in a disincentive to work and hence slow down the economy and reduce long-term tax revenues.
» Flexibility — taxes need to be fl  exible enough to adapt to a change in the economic environment without requiring the rewriting of tax legislation.
Impact of taxation
Taxation directly impacts on consumers, the government and the economy as a whole. However, taxation has varying impacts depending on the type of tax in question.
Impact on price and quantity 
The imposition of a sales tax will shift the supply curve of a product to the left (see Chapter 10) due to the higher costs of production. This will increase the price charged to consumers and reduce the quantity produced and sold. Depending on the price elasticity of demand for the product (see Chapter 11), this could reduce the amount of tax revenue for the government.
Impact on economic growth 
Taxation tends to reduce incentives to work and to produce. This has a negative impact on the economy as a whole. By contrast, tax cuts can boost domestic spending, thus benefi  ting individual customers, businesses and the economy (through job creation). Nevertheless, tax revenues are essential to fund government spending (such as the construction of schools, hospitals, railways, airports and roads), which fuels economic growth.
Case study: Income tax and incentives
The French government tried to introduce a 75 per cent income tax rate in 2012 for 
individuals earning incomes in excess of €1 million ($1.2m) per year. However, the proposals were overturned, with some economists arguing that the government would actually receive more tax revenue by cutting tax rates. This is because lower rates of tax can create incentives to work and also help to reduce tax avoidance and tax evasion.
Impact on infl  ation 
As taxation tends to reduce the spending ability of individuals and the profi  ts of 
fi  rms, it helps to reduce the likelihood of infl  ation (see Chapter 31). By contrast, a cut in taxes boosts the disposable income of households and fi  rms, and thus fuels infl  ationary pressures in the economy.
Impact on business location 
The rates of corporation tax and income tax will affect where multinational businesses choose to locate. For example, high corporation tax rates in Argentina (35%), Pakistan (35%) and Cameroon (38.5%) can discourage some companies from locating in these countries. As a result, foreign direct investment in these economies might be lower than otherwise. By contrast, it might be easier to 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   184 24/01/18   11:18 AMImpact of taxation
185attract workers in economies with low income tax rates, such as Bulgaria (10%), 
Macedonia (10%), Belarus (12%) and Hong Kong (15%).
Impact on social behaviour 
Taxation can be used to alter social behaviour by reducing the consumption of demerit goods (see Chapter 14). For example, taxing tobacco and alcohol should, in theory, reduce the demand for such products. Taxes are also used to protect the natural environment by charging those who pollute or damage it. For example, countries such as the UK and China tax cars based on their engine size because vehicles with larger engines tend to cause more pollution.
Impact on tax avoidance and tax evasion 
Payment of some taxes is avoidable. Tax avoidance is the legal act of not paying taxes — for example, non-smokers do not pay tobacco tax and non-overseas travellers do not pay air passenger departure taxes. However, tax evasion is illegal as this refers to non-payment of taxes due, perhaps by a business under-declaring its level of profi  ts. High levels of taxation will tend to encourage both tax avoidance and tax evasion. By contrast, low rates of taxation create far fewer incentives for households and fi  rms to avoid taxes or defraud the government.
Impact on the distribution of wealth 
Taxes can be used to help redistribute income and wealth from the relatively rich to the poorer members of society. For example, wealthier individuals will pay more income tax, sales taxes and stamp duty on their purchase of private properties. These funds can be used by the government to support education, healthcare and social benefi  ts for less affl  uent individuals in the economy.
Case study: Hong Kong’s plastic bag levy
Prior to July 2009, Hong 
Kong people used an average of 30 million plastic carrier bags every day! For a relatively small population of 7 million people, this meant the average person was using more than four plastic carrier bags per day, often on a single-use basis. This staggering fi  gure meant that the country’s landfi  lls would soon be unable to cope with the bags when they were thrown away. 
Hong Kong’s introduction 
of a HK$0.5 (5 US cents) tax on the use of carrier bags has encouraged people to use recycled shopping bags. In fact, demand for plastic carrier bags fell by 85 per cent within the fi  rst 2 days of the tax being introduced. 
This follows similar moves made by other countries such as China (in 2009) and 
Ireland (in 2002).
Activity
List ten uses of plastics in everyday life. Apart from the use of fi  nes (taxes), discuss how an economy should be encouraged to use less plastic.
Activity
List ten uses of plastics in everyday life. Apart from the use of fi  nes (taxes), discuss how 
an economy should be encouraged to use less plastic.
Deﬁ  nitions
Tax avoidance is the legal 
act of minimising payment of taxes, such as by avoiding spending on items with a large sales tax.Tax evasion is the illegal act of not paying the correct amount of tax, perhaps due to a fi  rm under-declaring its corporate profi  ts.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   185 24/01/18   11:18 AM26	 fiscal	policy
186Exam-style questions
1 In April 2017, infl  ation in the Czech Republic slowed to 0.25 per cent, partly 
due to the reduced spending in the economy caused by an increase in the 
country’s sales tax.a Explain how taxes can be used to reduce the rate of infl  ation in 
the Czech Republic. [4]
b Analyse how an increase in taxation might confl  ict with any two 
macroeconomic objectives of the Czech Republic government. [6]
2 In November 2008, following the recession caused by the global fi  nancial 
crisis, the UK government reduced the rate of value added tax (VAT) from 17.5 per cent to 15 per cent. However, by January 2011 the government’s escalating debt problems had forced VAT to increase to 20 per cent.a Explain how a reduction in VAT from 17.5 to 15 per cent might help to 
reduce the effects of a recession. [4]
b Analyse three impacts of the increase in VAT to 20 per cent. [6]
Activity 
Some countries such as Andorra, Brunei Darussalam, Oman and Qatar have a zero 
rate of income tax. Other countries such as Bahamas and Estonia have a zero rate of corporation tax. 
a Which other countries have a zero rate of income tax? 
b Investigate the reasons behind such government decisions. Be prepared to share 
your fi  ndings with the rest of the class.
Activity 
Some countries such as Andorra, Brunei Darussalam, Oman and Qatar have a zero 
rate of income tax. Other countries such as Bahamas and Estonia have a zero rate of 
Fiscal policy
Fiscal policy is the use of taxation and government expenditure strategies to 
infl  uence the level of economic activity and achieve macroeconomic aims such as high employment, economic growth and the control of infl  ation. For example, taxation can be used to redistribute income and wealth to benefi  t less wealthy members of society. Government spending can be used to improve standards of living, such as building schools, hospitals and transportation networks.
Fiscal policy measures 
Fiscal policy can be used either to expand or to contract economic activity in order to achieve macroeconomic objectives and promote economic stability.
Expansionary fi  scal policy is used to stimulate the economy, by increasing 
government spending and/or lowering taxes. For example, by increasing social security payments (such as unemployment benefi  ts and state pensions), domestic consumption should increase. This type of fi  scal policy is used to reduce the effects of an economic recession (see Chapter 29), by boosting gross domestic product and reducing unemployment.
By contrast, contractionary fi  scal policy is used to reduce the level of 
economic activity by decreasing government spending and/or raising taxes. For example, countries such as China and the USA have used property taxes to slow down escalating house prices. Contractionary fi  scal policies are used to reduce infl  ationary pressures during an economic boom (see Chapter 29).
Deﬁ  nition
Fiscal policy is the use 
of taxes and government spending to affect macroeconomic objectives such as economic growth and employment.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   186 24/01/18   11:19 AMEffects of fiscal policy on government macroeconomic aims
187In the short term, expansionary fi  scal policy has a negative impact on the 
government’s budget as revenues fall (because of lower taxes) and government 
spending increases. As the economy improves in the long run, people earn and spend more money (helping to raise tax revenues) and there is less need for the government to boost its own expenditure to stimulate the economy. The opposite case is true for the use of contractionary fi  scal policy (with a probable positive impact on the budget in the short run, but a negative impact in the long run).
Case study: China’s housing bubble
China’s phenomenal economic growth 
rate fuelled the demand for housing, making house prices skyrocket. Low interest rates and increased bank lending were further causes of the ‘housing bubble’ in China. 
The government stepped in to slow 
down the housing market. In 2013, government measures included higher stamp duties (property sales taxes) and the requirement for existing homebuyers to have a minimum 60 per cent deposit if they wanted to purchase a second property. Mainland Chinese homebuyers wishing to purchase property in neighbouring Hong Kong also faced higher barriers, including an additional 15 per cent sales tax for non-permanent residents.
Fiscal policy is also used to redistribute income and wealth in the economy. 
Some countries have quite high rates of income tax to reallocate resources from wealthier individuals to the poorer members of society. Austria, Belgium, Cuba and Senegal, for example, all have a top tax band of 50 per cent. However, this can cause severe distortions to the labour market.
Effects of fi  scal policy on government 
macroeconomic aims
Fiscal policy can be used to achieve a government’s macroeconomic aims. 
Examples are provided below.
» Economic growth — government capital expenditure on infrastructure (such as railways, motorways, schools and hospitals) helps to boost investment in the economy. Lower rates of corporation tax can help to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) into the country, thereby boosting the economy’s potential output.
» Low infl  ation (stable prices) — lower taxes, and hence higher FDI, can boost the productive capacity of the economy in the long run, which helps to keep the general price level relatively low. Contractionary fi  scal policy measures also help prevent price levels from soaring.
» Employment (low unemployment) — cuts in income tax can be used to create incentives for people to seek employment and to work harder. Government support for business start-ups, through subsidies or tax concessions, can also create incentives for entrepreneurs, thus helping to lower unemployment.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   187 24/01/18   11:19 AM26	 fiscal	policy
188
» Healthy balance of payments — relatively low rates of taxation help 
to keep domestic fi  rms competitive, thereby benefi  ting exporters. The government might also choose to subsidise domestic industries to improve their international competitiveness. These fi  scal measures should benefi  t the country’s balance of payments.
» Redistribution of income — the use of both progressive taxes and government spending (on welfare benefi  ts, education and healthcare) helps to redistribute income and wealth in the economy.
Exam-style questions
a Explain why expansionary fi  scal policy can cause a budget defi  cit for the 
government. [4]
b Analyse how fi  scal policy can be used to promote long-term economic 
growth. [6]
Chapter review questions
 1 What is meant by the government budget?
 2 What is the difference between a budget defi  cit and a budget surplus?
 3 What are the various reasons for government spending?
 4 What are the various reasons for taxation?
 5 How can taxes be classifi  ed?
 6 What is the difference between direct and indirect taxes?
 7 What is the difference between progressive, proportional and regressive taxes?
 8 What are the principles of taxation?
 9 How does tax avoidance differ from tax evasion?
10 What is meant by fi  scal policy?
11 What are the differences between expansionary and contractionary fi  scal policy?12 How might a government use fi  scal policy to achieve its macroeconomic aims?
Revision checklist
✔ The government budget refers to the government’s ﬁ  nancial plans in terms of planned revenues 
and expenditure. The budget can be in balance, deﬁ  cit or surplus.
✔ Reasons for government spending include: to provide essential goods and services, to redistribute 
income and wealth, and to correct market failures.
✔ The main reason for taxation is to raise funds for government expenditure.
✔ A tax is a government levy on income or expenditure.
✔ Taxation directly impacts on consumers, the government and the economy as a whole.
✔ The tax burden refers to the amount of tax that households and ﬁ  rms have to pay.
✔ Classiﬁ  cations of tax include: direct and indirect; and progressive, proportional and regressive.
✔ The principles of a good tax are: equity, economy, convenience, certainty, efﬁ  ciency and ﬂ  exibility.
✔ Fiscal policy is the use of taxation and government expenditure strategies to inﬂ  uence the level of 
economic activity and the government’s macroeconomic aims.
✔ Taxation and government spending have a direct impact on all ﬁ  ve macroeconomic aims.
 The government budget refers to the government’s ﬁ  nancial plans in terms of planned revenues 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   188 24/01/18   11:19 AM189
 27  Monetary policy
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne money supply
★ deﬁ  ne monetary policy
★ understand monetary policy measures
★ discuss the effects of monetary policy on macroeconomic aims.
Money supply
Money  is any commodity that can be used as a medium of exchange for the 
purchase of goods and services. The money supply refers to the amount of money 
in the economy at a particular point in time. This consists of coins, banknotes, 
bank deposits and central bank reserves (see Chapter 16).
▲ The money supply includes banknotes in circulation
Monetary policy
Monetary policy is the manipulation of interest rates, exchange rates and the 
money supply to control the amount of spending and investment in an economy. Interest rates can refer to the price of borrowing money or the yield from saving money at a fi  nancial institution. The money supply refers to the entire quantity of money circulating in an economy, including notes and coins, bank loans and bank deposits (see Chapter 16).
Direct control of the money supply is relatively diffi  cult as the defi  nition of money 
is quite loose and banks can create credit fairly easily (see Chapter 16). Manipulation 
Deﬁ  nition
Money supply refers to the 
amount of money in the economy at a particular point in time, e.g. coins, banknotes, bank deposits and central bank reserves.
Deﬁ  nition
Monetary policy refers to the use of interest rates, exchange rates and the money supply to control macroeconomic objectives and to affect the level of economic activity.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   189 24/01/18   11:19 AM27	moneTary	policy
190of exchange rates (see Chapter 38) is also rather difficult for many countries due to 
the reliance on international trade and compliance with the regulations of the World 
Trade Organization. Hence, most governments rely on interest rate policy to achieve economic stability. In most countries, the central bank or monetary authority (see Chapter 38) is responsible for making exchange rate changes.
▲ Monetary policy is used to control spending and investment in an economy
Monetary policy measures
There are three main monetary policy measures, as described below.
» Changes in interest rates — the main monetary policy measure is the use of interest rates to influence the level of economic activity. For example, higher interest rates will make borrowing more expensive and create more of an incentive to save, tending to reduce overall spending in the economy.
» Changes in money supply — the government can control the money supply in order to influence the level of economic activity. For example, allowing commercial banks to lend more money (rather than leaving a higher proportion of their deposits at the central bank) will tend to boost consumption and investment expenditure in the economy.
» Changes in foreign exchange rates — the foreign exchange market has a direct impact on the domestic money supply. For example, domestic customers need to purchase foreign currency in order to buy imports. The buying and selling of foreign currencies (see Chapter 38) will therefore affect the money supply in an economy.
Like fiscal policy, monetary policy can be used either to expand or to contract economic activity in the economy. 
Expansionary monetary policy, also known as loose monetary policy, aims to 
boost economic activity by expanding the money supply. This is done mainly by lowering interest rates. This makes borrowing more attractive to households and firms because they are charged lower interest repayments on their loans. Those with existing loans and mortgages have more disposable income, so they have more money available to spend.
With contractionary monetary policy, also known as tight monetary policy, 
an increase in interest rates tends to reduce overspending and limit investment in the economy. This slows down economic activity. Tight monetary policy is used to reduce the threat of inflation, although it can harm economic growth and therefore cause job losses in the long run.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   190 24/01/18   11:19 AMThe effects of monetary policy measures on macroeconomic aims
191The effects of monetary policy measures 
on macroeconomic aims
Monetary policy measures can enable the government to achieve its 
macroeconomic aims (see Chapter 25):
» Economic growth — the monetary policy measure of lower interest rates can be used to achieve economic growth. This will tend to reduce the cost of borrowing for households and fi  rms, thus boosting their consumption and investment respectively. Savers will receive a lower rate of return, discouraging savings and encouraging more spending. Finally, those with existing loans and mortgages will have lower repayments costs, and so will have more money to spend at their discretion. The combination of lower savings, more consumption and more investment will lead to economic growth.
» Full employment/low unemployment — lower interest rates, as described above, will tend to cause economic growth. More spending and investment in the economy will tend to create more jobs.
» Stable prices/low infl  ation — economic growth stimulated by lower interest rates will result in higher consumption and investment expenditure. This will increase the productive capacity of the economy, so more can be produced without having to incur higher prices. By contrast, higher interest rates are used to limit consumption and investment in order to control the rate of infl  ation. 
» Balance of payments stability — a lower exchange rate, through government intervention in the foreign exchange market (see Chapter 38), will tend to improve the international competitiveness of the country. Hence, this should help to improve the balance of payments (see Chapter 39).
Case study: Quantitative easing
Following the global fi  nancial crisis of 2008, the UK and US central banks made 
signifi  cant cuts in interest rates to encourage people to spend money, rather than to save it. However, with interest rates at their lowest levels in history, near zero per cent, they could not go any lower. 
The Bank of England and the Federal Reserve had one other option — quantitative 
easing (QE). This form of monetary policy injects money directly into the economy. The central bank purchases bonds, which are a debt security or a promise to pay a lender at a later date. The institutions selling these bonds to the government, such as commercial banks or insurance companies, then have ‘new’ money in their accounts, thus helping to boost the money supply and to promote lending (and hence spending).
Study tip
There is no single interest 
‘rate’ in an economy but a structure of different interest rates. This is because there is no single market for loans, such as bank overdrafts, credit cards and mortgages. Different rates of interest are charged for all of these different kinds of loan. Borrowers also have different levels of risk — for example, lending money to governments and large multinational companies tends to be less risky than lending money to sole traders or partnerships.
Activity 
Japan’s interest rates averaged about 3 per cent between 1972 and 2017, and have 
rarely gone beyond zero per cent since 1999. Use the internet to investigate the reasons behind Japan’s policy of extremely low interest rates. Here’s a starting point: http://goo.gl/50gnF  
Activity 
Japan’s interest rates averaged about 3 per cent between 1972 and 2017, and have 
rarely gone beyond zero per cent since 1999. Use the internet to investigate the 
Limitations of monetary policy
As with fi  scal policy, there are time lags in the reaction to interest rate changes 
in the economy. This can make the effectiveness of monetary policy less certain or even destabilising for the economy.
Furthermore, economic activity is not only dependent on interest rates. Other 
factors such as consumer and business confi  dence levels have an impact on GDP. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   191 24/01/18   11:19 AM27	 moneTary	policy
192
During the global fi  nancial crisis of 2008, despite interest rates being close to 
or equal to zero per cent in countries such as Japan and the USA, the lack of business and consumer confi  dence led to a prolonged economic recession.
Some economists argue that the use of monetary policy can be counterproductive 
because it restricts economic activity and discourages foreign direct investment in the country. For example, higher interest rates raise the costs of production for fi  rms, as existing and new loans become more expensive. This has a negative impact on profi  ts, job creation, research and development expenditure, and innovation. Hence, higher interest rates (used to combat infl  ation) can confl  ict with other macroeconomic objectives, especially with economic growth and employment.
Exam-style question
Which option is not an example of monetary policy? [1]
A Capital investment in research and developmentB Interest rate policyC The money supplyD Bank credit control
Exam-style questions
1 Explain how monetary policy can be used to infl  uence the level of 
economic activity. [4]
2 Explain how the use of interest rate policy can help a country to control 
its infl  ation rate. [4]
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by the money supply?
2 What is monetary policy, and what are the three categories of monetary policy 
measures?
3 How does loose monetary policy differ from contractionary monetary policy?4 How can monetary policy be used to achieve an economy’s macroeconomic aims?5 What are the limitations of using monetary policy to control economic activity?
Revision checklist
✔ The money supply refers to the amount of money in the economy at a 
particular point in time, such as coins, banknotes, bank deposits and 
central bank reserves.
✔ Monetary policy refers to the use of interest rates, exchange rates and 
the money supply to control macroeconomic objectives and to affect the level of economic activity.
✔ Monetary policy measures include: controlling the money supply, the 
manipulation of exchange rates, and the use of interest rate policy.
✔ Expansionary monetary policy is used to boost economic activity by 
expanding the money supply or lowering interest rates.
✔ Tight monetary policy involves an increase in interest rates in order to 
reduce overspending and limit investment in the economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   192 24/01/18   11:19 AM193
 28  Supply-side policy
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne supply-side policy
★ understand various supply-side policy measures
★ discuss the effects of supply-side policy measures on government 
macroeconomic aims.
Supply-side policies
Supply-side policies are long-term strategies aimed at increasing the productive 
capacity of the economy by improving the quality and/or quantity of factors of production (see Chapter 2). Examples of supply-side policies are: education and training, labour market reforms, lower direct taxes, deregulation, improving incentives to work and invest, and privatisation.
▲ Education is a supply-side policy
With more and improved factors of production, the economy can produce more goods and services. This can be shown by an outward shift of the country’s production possibility curve from PPC
1 to PPC 2 in Figure 28.1.
OPPC1PPC2Output of goods
Output of services
▲ Figure 28.1 Supply-side policies and the PPC
Deﬁ  nition
Supply-side policies are 
long-term measures to increase the productive capacity of the economy, leading to an outward shift of the production possibility curve.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   193 24/01/18   11:19 AM28	supply-side 	policy
194Supply-side policy measures
Education and training
Improved education and training in the economy result in a workforce with better 
skills, productivity, flexibility and mobility. Hence, increased spending on education and training is likely to eventually improve the productive capacity of the economy.
However, there is often under-provision of educational services in a market 
economic system (see Chapter 14), so there is often a need for government intervention. The government may choose to spend money directly on providing education and training, or it may prefer to provide incentives for private firms to supply these services. For example, government-funded retraining schemes can help the unemployed to improve their chances of finding paid employment. Increased government spending on education is another example. The government is likely to set and monitor quality standards of teaching in schools. However, such supply-side policies will cost the government a lot of money, requiring higher taxes.
Labour market reforms
Supply-side economists argue that there are benefits of making labour markets more flexible, as this results in greater productivity. Such labour market reforms include reducing or removing:
» the power of trade unions (see Chapter 19)
» unemployment benefits (see Chapter 30)
» minimum wages (see Chapter 18).
Labour market reforms help to promote greater competition through the removal of rigidities in labour markets. Such barriers include excessive and complex employment legislation and the threat of strike action from trade unions, which hinder efficiency in labour markets. In the long run, such supply-side policies should reduce unemployment as labour markets become more internationally competitive.
Lower direct taxes
Lower direct taxes (see Table 28.1) can create incentives for work, especially for people on low wage rates, because they get to keep a greater proportion of what they earn. Over time, higher disposable income provides a boost to consumption expenditure and hence an increase in GDP.
Table 28.1 Personal income tax rates, selected countries
Country Highest income 
tax rate (%)Lowest income tax rate (%)Corporate tax rate (%)Sales tax (VAT / GST) (%)
Qatar
 0  0 10  0
Kuwait  0  0 15 16
Russia 13 13 20 18
Isle of Man 20 10  0 20
Singapore 22  0 17  7
Nigeria 24  7 30  5
New Zealand 33 10.5 28 15
Vietnam 35  5 20 10
Taiwan 45  6 17  5
Sweden 60 31 22 25
Source: adapted from Trading Economics
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   194 24/01/18   11:19 AMSupply-side policy measures
195Deregulation
Deregulation refers to the reduction or removal of barriers to entry in order to make 
markets more competitive. Increased competition in an industry tends to lead to lower prices and better-quality output of goods and services. An example of deregulation is allowing new firms to enter an industry previously dominated by a monopolist, such as a single provider of telecommunications services in a country. The aim of this is to make the market more competitive and increase efficiency. However, the expected benefits of deregulation only materialise (if at all) after new firms have entered and competed in the market, which could take a long time to happen.
Incentives to work
Direct tax cuts encourage people to find work or to work harder. In general, countries that impose lower rates of income tax will tend to create greater incentives to work. In Qatar and Kuwait, no income tax is charged (see Table 28.1). Lower rates of indirect taxes, such as value added tax (VAT) and goods and services tax (GST), can create incentives for households and individuals to spend. In addition, the government could reduce welfare benefits to the unemployed, thereby creating more of an incentive for them to seek employment.
Incentives to invest
Tax incentives can also stimulate firms to invest in the economy in order to maximise their profits in the long run. In general, countries that impose lower rates of corporate tax (see Table 28.1) will tend to create greater incentives for firms to invest so they can maximise their returns. By contrast, high corporate tax rates in countries such as Nigeria and New Zealand (see Table 28.1) can reduce incentives to invest in these nations.
Alternatively, governments may provide firms with subsidies to give them an 
incentive to invest in enterprise zones. These are locations with relatively high rates of unemployment, where the government creates financial incentives for firms to relocate. Such incentives include tax rebates and reduced regulations in order to attract private sector investments. Enterprise zones are common in the UK, USA, China and India.
Supply-side policies focus on the importance of investment in research and 
development (R&D), new product development, new technologies and infrastructure, thus contributing to growth of the economy. As with all forms of supply-side policies, capital increases the productive capacity and productivity of the economy in the long run. For example, America’s investment expenditure has generated new products for consumption, such as Apple’s iPhone (smartphones) and iPad (tablet computers), and Tesla’s environmentally friendly electric cars. Such investments have created huge competitive advantages at an international level for the USA.
Privatisation 
This is the policy of selling off state-owned assets (such as government properties or public sector businesses) to the private sector so they can be run more efficiently. Private sector firms are motivated by profit, so they can, in theory, develop better products and deliver better services. Competition, productivity and efficiency are essential components of the private sector, thus helping to boost the productive potential of the economy. 
Privatisation of state industry was a fundamental part of the UK’s supply-side 
policy in the 1980s and 1990s, which helped to raise much government revenue, cut public sector expenditure and foster an entrepreneurial culture. Chapter 15 provides more information about privatisation.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   195 24/01/18   11:19 AM28	 supply-side	policy
196The effects of supply-side policy measures 
on macroeconomic aims
Supply-side policy measures can enable the government to achieve its fi  ve 
macroeconomic aims (see Chapter 25):
» Economic growth — supply-side policy measures can be used to achieve sustainable economic growth by increasing the productive capacity of the economy. For example, investment in education and cuts in corporate taxes can help to boost economic growth in the long run.
» Full employment/low unemployment — an increase in the economy’s productive capacity will tend to increase national output, thereby creating jobs in the economy in the long term. Also, supply-side policies such as investment in training can help to reduce both frictional and structural unemployment (see Chapter 30).
» Stable prices/low inflation — as supply-side policies increase the productive potential of the economy, they help to prevent the general price level from rising beyond control. A limitation of using demand-side policies such as fiscal and monetary policies (see Chapters 26 and 27) to achieve economic growth is that they stimulate demand-pull inflation. Supply-side-policy measures increase the productive capacity of the economy, resulting in economic growth, without higher prices.
» Balance of payments stability — since supply-side policies can improve productivity and national output without putting upward pressure on the general price level, the international competitiveness of the country should improve. This helps to boost the economy’s export earnings. Therefore, supply-side policies tend to improve a country’s balance of payments (see Chapter 39).
» Redistribution of income — supply-side policies such as greater investment in education and training, along with greater incentives to work, tend to benefi  t low income earners more than high income earners. For example, a cut in the basic rate of income tax means that low income earners have a proportionately higher disposable income. They are more likely to spend any extra income they have due to the lower rate of direct tax.
The main criticism (or limitation) of supply-side policies is the time that it takes to reap the benefi  ts. For example, it might take decades for a nation to enjoy the benefi  ts of an improved education system or better infrastructure in the country.
Exam-style question
Which option is not a supply-side policy? [1]
A Deregulation of marketsB Human capital investmentC Progressive income tax policiesD Tax reforms to create incentives to work
Exam-style questions
1 Defi  ne the term ‘supply-side policies’. [2]
2 Analyse how supply-side policies can help to achieve any two  
macroeconomic objectives. [6]
Activities
1 Investigate the 
supply-side policies 
in your home country, or a country of your choice.
2 How have these 
policies helped or hindered the productive capacity of the economy?
Activities
1
 Investigate the 
supply-side policies 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   196 24/01/18   11:19 AMThe effects of supply-side policy measures on macroeconomic aims
197
Activity
Use the Internet to research the number of years of schooling in fi  ve countries of your 
choice. Try to choose a combination of low-, middle- and high-income countries.
a Present your fi  ndings based on the mean average years of schooling.
b How do your fi  gures differ between males and females?c How close is the relationship between a country’s mean average years of schooling 
and its gross domestic product (GDP)?
Activity
Use the Internet to research the number of years of schooling in fi  ve countries of your 
choice. Try to choose a combination of low-, middle- and high-income countries.
Chapter review questions
 1 What is meant by supply-side policy?
 2 What are the main supply-side policy measures?
 3 How does investment in education and training create productive capacity in the economy?
 4 How do labour market reforms create greater fl  exibility in the economy?
 5 How do lower taxes create incentives to work and invest?
 6 What is deregulation?
 7 What are enterprise zones?
 8 How does privatisation create greater productive capacity in the economy?
 9 How do supply-side policies affect the fi  ve macroeconomic aims?
10 What is the main criticism (or limitation) of supply-side policies?
Revision checklist
✔ Supply-side policies are long-term measures to increase the productive 
capacity of the economy, leading to an outward shift of the production 
possibility curve.
✔ Examples of supply-side policy measures are: education and training, 
labour market reforms, lower direct taxes, deregulation, incentives to work, incentives to invest and privatisation.
✔ Supply-side policies focus on the importance of investment in research 
and development (R&D), new product development, new technologies and infrastructure.
✔ Lower direct taxes tend to create incentives for work, especially for 
those on low wages.
✔ Reducing welfare beneﬁ  ts to the unemployed can create incentives for 
them to seek employment.
✔ Deregulation involves the reduction or removal of barriers to competitive 
markets.
✔ Lower direct taxes can create incentives for ﬁ  rms to invest in their 
pursuit of proﬁ  t maximisation.
✔ Privatisation is the act of selling state-owned assets in order to increase 
competition, productivity and efﬁ  ciency.
✔ Supply-side policy measures can be used to achieve sustainable 
economic growth, full employment/low unemployment, stable prices/low inﬂ  ation, balance of payments stability and a redistribution of income in the economy.
 Supply-side policies are long-term measures to increase the productive 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   197 24/01/18   11:19 AM198
 29  Economic growth
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne economic growth
★ measure economic growth using real gross domestic product (GDP) and 
GDP per head
★ discuss the causes and consequences of recession
★ discuss the causes and consequences of economic growth
★ discuss the effectiveness of policies to promote economic growth. 
Economic growth
Economic growth is the annual increase in the level of national output — that 
is, the annual percentage change in the country’s gross domestic product (GDP). Hence, in theory, an increase in any of the components of GDP (consumption, investment, government spending and net exports) can cause economic growth. 
Economic growth increases the long-term productive capacity of the economy, 
as shown by the outward shift of the production possibility curve in Figure 29.1. 
OPPC1PPC2Producer goods
Consumer goodsEconomic growth can be shown
diagrammatically by an outwardshift of the production possibilitycurve (
PPC) for an economy. In this case,
a combination of an increase in thequantity and quality of factors ofproduction shifts the 
PPC outwards
from PPC1 to PPC2, creating more
producer and consumer goods in the economy
▲ Figure 29.1 Economic growth
Measurement of economic growth
Economic growth can be measured using real gross domestic product (real GDP) 
and GDP per head (or GDP per capita). These are arrived at from a calculation of nominal GDP as follows.
Nominal gross domestic product (nominal GDP) measures the monetary value 
of goods and services produced within a country during a given period of time, usually one year. The components of nominal GDP are:
» Consumption expenditure (C) — this refers to the total spending on goods and services by individuals and households in an economy. Examples are spending on housing, transport, food, clothing and domestic holidays.
» Investment expenditure (I) — this refers to the capital spending of fi  rms used to increase production and to expand the economy’s productive capacity. Examples are spending on new machinery and technologies, and on the construction of new factories.
Deﬁ  nitions
Economic growth is the 
annual increase in the level of national output, i.e. the annual percentage change in gross domestic product.Gross domestic product measures the monetary value of goods and services produced within a country for a given period of time, usually one year.
Deﬁ  nitions
Nominal gross domestic product (nominal GDP) measures the monetary value of goods and services produced within a country during a given period of time, usually one year.Consumption is the value of all private household consumption within a country.Investment expenditure is the sum of capital spending by all businesses within a country.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   198 24/01/18   11:19 AMCauses and consequences of recession
199» Government spending (G ) — this is the total consumption and investment 
expenditure of the government. Examples are spending on infrastructure 
(such as rail and road networks) and on the construction of new schools and hospitals. The calculation of government spending ignores payments made to others without any corresponding output, such as unemployment benefi  ts.
» Export earnings (X ) — this measures the monetary value of all exports sold 
to foreign buyers. For example, France exports a huge amount of wine, dairy products and fruit, so the earnings from these exports are included in the measure of its GDP.
» Import expenditure (M ) — this measures the monetary value of all payments 
for imports. France imports a lot of cars, oil and smartphones. The spending on these items means that money leaves the French economy, so this must be deducted in the calculation of its GDP. The difference between the values of a country’s exports and imports (X  – M) is called net exports.
Therefore, a country’s GDP is calculated using the formula:
GDP = C  + I + G + (X  – M )
From this, two measures can be used to gauge the level of economic growth:
» Real GDP refers to the value of national income (GDP) that is adjusted for infl  ation. It refl  ects the true value of goods and services produced in a given year because infl  ation artifi  cially raises the value of a country’s output.
» GDP per head (or GDP per capita) measures the gross domestic product of a country divided by its population size. This is a key measure of a country’s economic growth and standards of living, as GDP per head indicates the mean average national income per person. Ceteris paribus, the larger the population size, the lower the GDP per head for a certain level of GDP (see Table 29.1).
Table 29.1 GDP per capita: selected countries, 2017
Country GDP per capita (US$) Nominal GDP (US$bn)
USA  51,638.10 18,036.65
China   6,497.50 11,064.66
India   1,751.70  2,088.80
Indonesia   3,834.06     861.93
Netherlands  51,268.47      750.28
Kenya   1,133.46      63.40
Luxembourg 107,035.96       56.80
Source: Trading Economics
Causes and consequences of recession
Economic growth occurs when there is an increase in the level of economic activity in a country over time. The business cycle (also known as the trade cycle) describes the fl  uctuations in economic activity in a country over time. These 
fl  uctuations create a long-term trend of growth in the economy (see Figure 29.2).
Deﬁ  nitions
Net exports refers to 
the monetary value of the difference between a nation’s export earnings and its import expenditure.Real GDP refers to the value of national income (GDP) adjusted for infl  ation to refl  ect the true value of goods and services produced in a given year.GDP per head measures the average value of annual GDP per capita (person).
Deﬁ  nition
The business cycle (or trade cycle) describes the fl  uctuations in the economic activity of a country over time, creating a long-term trend of economic growth in the economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   199 24/01/18   11:19 AM29	 economic	groWTh
200
Gross domestic product ( $)
TimeEconomic
activityPeak
Recession
SlumpBoomRecoveryTrendAt the peak of the tradecycle, economic activityis at its highest level.Unemployment is low,while consumer andbusiness conﬁdencelevels are high.A recovery in the business cycle occurs whenthe level of GDP starts to rise, thus recoveringfrom the slump. The levels of consumption,investment and net exports gradually rise, thusleading to employment opportunities in the longrun.
During a boom (or economic growth), the levelof economic activity rises, caused by anycombination of an increase in consumption,investment, government spending and netexport earnings. Technically, economic growthoccurs when GDP increases for two consecutivequarters (6 months).
At the bottom of a recession in the trade cycle, a slump (ortrough) is said to exist. There will be high unemploymentwhile consumption, investment and net export earnings willbe low. Many businesses will have collapsed andconsumers have little conﬁdence in the economy. Hence,government spending may be needed to help the economyto recover from the recession.There is a fall in GDP during aneconomic recession. Technically, arecession occurs when a country’sGDP falls for two consecutivequarters. During a recession, thereis a decline in consumption,investment and net exports (due tofalling export earnings).O
▲ Figure 29.2 The business cycle
There are several interrelated reasons why a recession may come about:
» a higher level of unemployment
» higher interest rates, which discourages investment but raises demand for savings
» greater uncertainty in the economy
» lower rates of disposable income, causing a fall in consumer spending
» lower levels of government expenditure
» a decline in the demand for exports
» lower levels of consumer and business confi  dence.
Case study: Recession in the PIGS economies
Following the global fi  nancial crisis of 2008, the economies of Portugal, Ireland, 
Greece and Spain (PIGS) faced a major economic downturn in their business cycles. By 2013, Greece and Spain were recording unemployment rates of 26.8 and 26.6 per cent respectively. Spain’s youth unemployment rate (among those aged 21 and below) reached 55 per cent — the highest in EU history. Under such extreme economic circumstances, the government needs to intervene to help the economy to recover. All four PIGS economies received fi  nancial bailouts of the following amounts:
• Portugal = $114 billion
• Ireland = $113 billion
• Greece = $159 billion
• Spain = $130 billion
Activity
List four ways in which a government can deal with the problem of mass unemployment. Discuss which one of these four policies is the most effective, and why.
Activity
List four ways in which a government can deal with the problem of mass 
unemployment. Discuss which one of these four policies is the most effective, and why.
Deﬁ  nition
Recession occurs in the 
business cycle when there is a fall in GDP for two consecutive quarters.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   200 24/01/18   11:19 AMCauses and consequences of economic growth
201Causes and consequences of economic 
growth
An increase in any of the components of GDP (consumption, investment, 
government spending or net exports) can cause economic growth. In addition, an increase in the quantity and/or the quality of factors of production can also create economic growth, such as an increase in the labour supply or improvements in the state of technology.
The factors that account for the differences in the economic growth rates of 
different countries include variations in the following:
» Factor endowments — this refers to the quantity and quality of a country’s factors of production. For example, Saudi Arabia is well endowed in the supply of oil, France has plenty of arable land for its agricultural output, and Australia has many natural resources such as coal, gold and iron ore. These countries can therefore specialise production on a large scale and benefit from economies of scale (see Chapter 20) and export their lower-price products in overseas markets. By contrast, countries that lack natural resources, land and productive labour will tend to struggle to achieve economic growth.
» The labour force — the size, skills and mobility of the economy’s workforce has an impact on the country’s economic growth. For example, India’s large labour force and Germany’s highly skilled workers have contributed to the economic growth of these countries. The mobility of labour refers to the extent to which workers can change between jobs (known as occupational mobility) and the extent to which they are willing and able to move to different locations for employment (known as geographical mobility). Generally, the more occupationally and geographically mobile workers are in a country, the greater its economic growth is likely to be.
» Labour productivity — this refers to the amount of goods and services that workers produce in a given time period. It is often referred to as output per worker, expressed as a monetary value (GDP divided by the country’s labour force). Labour productivity (the productive use of labour) is a key determinant of economic growth. It depends on several interrelated factors such as the qualifications, experience, training and motivation of the labour force. Technological advances can also enhance labour productivity, such as the use of internet technologies in e-commerce (online trading). An increase in the labour productivity of a country helps to improve its international competitiveness and hence its prospects for economic growth.
» Investment expenditure — investment is a component of overall demand in the economy, so any increase in investment should help to boost the country’s GDP. Investment helps to boost the country’s productive capacity in the long run. Investment expenditure on physical capital, such as the use of computers in production (see Chapter 21), can also help to improve labour productivity. In order to remain competitive in the long run, countries must invest in capital resources.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   201 24/01/18   11:19 AM29	 economic	groWTh
202
▲ Japan’s Honda, Nissan and Toyota production plants in the UK help to create jobs in the UK 
and therefore boost its GDP
Activity 
Discuss in pairs the reasons for the following:
a Why government spending on infrastructure (such as road and rail networks) and 
training programmes for the unemployed are examples of investment expenditure.
b Why the spending by foreign tourists in Paris represents export earnings for France.
c Why investment is important for a country’s economic growth.
Activity 
Discuss in pairs the reasons for the following:
Positive consequences of economic growth
In general, economic growth is desirable due to its positive consequences for 
members of society. These advantages include the following:
» Improved standards of living — economic growth tends to lead to higher standards of living for the average person. Higher income levels in a country enable people to spend more money to meet their needs and wants (see Chapter 1). This helps to eliminate absolute poverty in the country.
» Employment — economic growth leads to higher levels of employment in the economy. This helps to raise consumption and encourages further investment in capital, helping to sustain economic growth. 
» Tax revenues — economic growth is associated with higher levels of spending in the economy. This generates more tax revenues for the government. For example, the government can collect more from sales taxes (on consumption), corporate tax (on the profi  ts of fi  rms) and import taxes. Hence, there are more funds for the government to use to further sustain the growth of the economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   202 24/01/18   11:19 AMCauses and consequences of economic growth
203Exam-style questions
According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, the economy of Macau, a self-
administering region of China, grew by 14.3 per cent in 2013 — the highest economic growth rate for any country in the year. The island nation is the world’s biggest gambling market ahead of Las Vegas, so it enjoys huge tax revenues from gambling proceeds. In 2011, Macau enjoyed a stunning 20.7 per cent growth rate. This rate is not sustainable, but Macau was still enjoying 7 per cent GDP growth in 2017. The government is investing huge amounts of money to attract a wider range of tourists, and casino giants such as Sands and MGM Resort are also investing large sums of money in the economy.
a
 Define economic growth.  [2]
b Explain how investment in Macau helps to boost its economic growth.  [4]
Negative consequences of economic growth
Despite the advantages of economic growth, there are also potential drawbacks:
» Environmental consequences — high rates of economic growth can create 
negative externalities such as pollution, congestion, climate change and land erosion (see Chapter 14). Such environmental impacts can damage people’s wellbeing and quality of life in the long run.
» Risk of inflation — if the economy grows due to excessive demand, there is the danger of demand-pull inflation (see Chapter 31). This can lead to prices of goods and services rising to unstable levels, with negative consequences for the economy, such as a decline in the country’s international competitiveness.
» Inequalities in income and wealth — although the country as a whole might experience economic growth, not everyone will benefit in the same way. Economic growth often creates greater disparities in the distribution of income and wealth — the rich get richer and the poor get relatively poorer, creating a widening gap between the rich and poor. Forbes magazine reported that in 2017, the top ten billionaires in the USA (who happened to all be male) had a combined wealth of over $427 billion — equal to the wealth of the poorest 3.6 billion people on the planet! Put another way, their wealth was worth the same as the poorest half of the world’s population. The wealth of these ten billionaires was more than twice as much as Vietnam’s GDP, and 24 times greater than the GDP of Cambodia!
» Resource depletion — economic growth often involves using up the world’s scarce resources at rates that are not sustainable. For example, deforestation and overfishing have led to problems in the ecosystem.
Hence, economic growth does not necessarily resolve a country’s socioeconomic problems, such as resource depletion, market failures (see Chapter 14) and income inequality.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   203 24/01/18   11:19 AM29	 economic	groWTh
204
▲ Pollution — a negative consequence of rapid economic growth in China
Activity 
In small groups, research the economic problems of overfi  shing. Websites such as 
http://overfi  shing.org and http://ocean.nationalgeographic.com will help. Be prepared to present your fi  ndings to the rest of the class.
Activity 
In small groups, research the economic problems of overfi  shing. Websites such as 
http://overfi  shing.org
Policies to promote economic growth
Economic growth can be promoted by using macroeconomic policies to increase 
demand in the economy and/or boost the productive capacity of the economy. These policies include demand-side policies (namely fi  scal and monetary policies) and supply-side policies.
» Fiscal policy involves the use of taxation and/or government spending to 
control the level of economic activity in the economy. If demand in the economy is too low, the government may choose to stimulate economic growth by cutting taxes and/or increasing its own expenditure in order to boost the level of economic activity. This should also have a positive impact on employment in the economy. See Chapter 26 for more about fi  scal policy.
» Monetary policy involves the central bank changing interest rates in order to 
control the level of demand and hence economic activity. To promote economic growth, lower interest rates can be used to cut the costs of borrowing to consumers and fi  rms. This should help to fund consumer expenditure and business investments, thereby boosting economic growth. See Chapter 27 for more about monetary policy.
» While both fi  scal and monetary policies target demand in order to achieve 
economic growth, supply-side policies are used to increase the economy’s productive capacity. These policies seek to increase competition, productivity and innovation in order to promote economic growth. Examples include government funding to encourage education and training. A reduction in corporate taxes can also encourage risk taking and foreign direct investment in the economy. In the long run, supply-side policies increase the productive capacity of the economy, thereby promoting economic growth. See Chapter 28 for more about supply-side policy.Study tip
While economic growth 
is generally seen as a desirable macroeconomic objective, remember that individuals do not benefi  t equally from economic growth.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   204 24/01/18   11:19 AMPolicies to promote economic growth
205Exam-style questions
In Sri Lanka, economic growth has seen the increased use of pesticides and 
chemical fertilisers to increase the amount of crops produced. The growth of the tourism industry has brought about an increase in the construction of roads, hotels and guest houses. This has created jobs but at a cost to natural wildlife habitats.
1 Identify the social costs and benefi  ts of economic growth in Sri Lanka. [4]
2 Discuss the potential long-term impacts of economic growth in Sri Lanka 
and whether the benefi  ts outweigh the costs. [8]
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by real gross domestic product (GDP)?
2 What is economic growth and how is it calculated?3 What are the causes of economic growth?4 What are the consequences, both positive and negative, of economic growth?5 What is meant by a recession?6 What is the business cycle?7 How do calculations of GDP per head help to measure economic growth?8 What are the main policies used to promote economic growth?
Revision checklist
✔ Economic growth is the annual increase in the level of national output — 
that is, the annual percentage change in the country’s gross domestic 
product (GDP). It can be represented in a diagram by an outward shift of the PPC.
✔ Economic growth can be measured using real gross domestic product 
(real GDP) and GDP per head (or GDP per capita).
✔ Nominal gross domestic product (nominal GDP) measures the monetary 
value of goods and services produced within a country, per year . It is calculated using the formula: C + I + G + (X – M).
✔ Real GDP refers to the value of national income (GDP) that is adjusted for 
inﬂ  ation.
✔ GDP per head (GDP per capita) measures the GDP of a country divided by 
the population size.
✔ The business cycle (also known as the trade cycle) describes the 
ﬂ  uctuations in economic activity in a country over time: boom, recession, slump and recovery.
✔ Causes of economic growth depend on the quality and quantity of a 
country’s factors of production, such as factor endowments, the labour force, labour productivity and investment expenditure.
✔ There are both positive and negative consequences of economic growth.
✔ Policies to promote economic growth include: expansionary ﬁ  scal policy, 
loose monetary policy and supply-side policies.
 Economic growth is the annual increase in the level of national output — 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   205 24/01/18   11:19 AM206
 30  Employment and unemployment
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne employment, unemployment and full employment
★ explain changing patterns and level of employment
★ measure unemployment
★ explain causes/types of unemployment
★ discuss the consequences of unemployment
★ discuss the policies to reduce unemployment.
Employment, unemployment and full 
employment
Employment refers to the economic use of labour as a factor of production. For 
example, people may work in the primary, secondary or tertiary sectors of the economy (see Chapter 20). Employment also includes those who are 
self-employed.
High employment, or low unemployment, is a key macroeconomic objective of 
all governments. There are several reasons for this:
» High employment raises standards of living for the average person in the 
country (see Chapter 32).
» It promotes economic growth — another key macroeconomic objective (see 
Chapter 29).
» It increases tax revenues (due to higher levels of income and spending in the 
economy), which are used to fi  nance government spending.
» It reduces the fi  nancial burden and opportunity cost to the government as 
spending on welfare benefi  ts falls.
» It prevents ‘brain drain’ from the economy. This can occur during periods of 
high unemployment when highly skilled workers leave the country in search of 
job opportunities elsewhere.
» It reduces income and wealth inequalities — poorer people are more affected 
by unemployment as they lack savings and wealth.
Unemployment occurs when people of working age are both willing and able to work but cannot fi  nd employment. The United Nations International Labour Organization (ILO) states the lower limit of the working age to be 15 years old. While there is no offi  cial upper limit, many countries use an age limit of between 65 and 70. For example, the offi  cial retirement age for females in the UK is 66 years and 5 months, while the retirement age is 67 years for all workers in Norway, Poland and the USA. Figure 30.1 shows the unemployment rates in Portugal from 2007 to 2017.
Deﬁ  nition
Employment refers to the 
use of factors of production in the economy, such as labour.
Deﬁ  nition
Unemployment occurs when people of working age are both willing and able to work but cannot fi  nd employment.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   206 24/01/18   11:19 AMChanging patterns and levels of employment
2072008 2010 2012 2014 20166%
81012141618
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 30.1 Unemployment rates: Portugal, 2007–17
Full employment refers to the ideal situation when everyone in a country who is 
willing and able to work has a job. Governments strive to ensure that everyone who is able and willing to work fi  nds employment. This helps the economy to make the most of its human resources.
Changing patterns and levels
of employment
Employment patterns change over time with changes in economic trends. For 
example, there have been large job losses in manufacturing industries in the USA and the UK as many fi  rms have shifted their operations to India and China. On the other hand, other job opportunities in the tertiary sector have been created in the USA and the UK. 
Changing employment patterns include the following:
» Employment sector — as a country develops, the number of people employed in the primary sector tends to fall, with the majority of workers being employed in the tertiary sector (see Table 30.1).
Table 30.1 Output by sector (%): selected countries, 2017
Country GDP — composition by sector (%)
Primary Secondary Tertiary
Luxembourg  0.2 11.1 88.7
USA  1.1 19.4 79.5
Denmark  1.1 23.4 75.5
Nepal 29.4 20.2 50.4
Ethiopia 36.2 17.0 46.8
Somalia 60.2   7.3 32.5
Source: CIA, World Factbook
Deﬁ  nition
Full employment means 
that everyone in a country who is willing and able to work has a job.
Study tip
Not all people of working 
age are willing to participate in employment. This will depend on the country’s welfare benefi  ts scheme and social attitudes, such as attitudes towards women in the workforce.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   207 24/01/18   11:19 AM30	 employmenT	and	unemploymenT
208»  Delayed entry to the workforce — as more people study to tertiary education 
level, the average age of employees entering the workforce rises. Graduates could be aged around 25 by the time they complete their fi  rst degree and master’s degrees. More females and mature students have also entered tertiary education, again limiting the potential size of the economy’s workforce.
»  Ageing population — this occurs when the average age of the population 
rises, partly due to lower birth rates and longer life spans in developed economies. The lower labour supply means that fi  rms are more willing to employ older employees and hire people beyond their retirement age. The economic consequences of an ageing population are examined in Chapter 34.
» Formal sector employment — as an economy develops, there is an increase in the proportion of workers employed in the formal economy and a decline in the proportion who work in the informal sector. Employment is formal, with workers paying income taxes and contributing to the country’s offi  cial GDP.
» Female participation rates — as a country grows and develops, there tends to be a greater proportion of women active in the labour force (see Table 30.2). This is due to changes in social attitudes towards women in the economy. In economically developed countries, women are choosing to have fewer children and at a later age, partly due to the high costs of raising children but also because more women opt to pursue a professional career.
» Public sector employment — as more countries around the world move towards a market economy, with less direct government intervention, there is a decline in the proportion of people employed in the public sector.
» Flexible working patterns — changes in the world economy have meant that fi  rms need to be far more fl  exible in order to compete internationally. Examples of fl  exible working patterns include fi  rms hiring more part-time staff, allowing employees to work from home, introducing fl  exible working hours and outsourcing non-core functions (such as accounting, cleaning, security and ICT) to other service providers.
Measuring unemployment
There are two main ways of measuring (or defi  ning) unemployment: the claimant count and the labour force survey.
Deﬁ  nitions
Formal sector employment 
refers to offi  cially recorded employment, where workers pay income taxes and contribute to the country’s offi  cial GDP.The female participation rate measures the 
proportion of women who are active in the labour force. As an economy grows and develops, there tends to be a higher female participation rate.
Table 30.2 Female participation rates (% of the female population): selected countries, 1990 and 2016
Country 1990 2016
Australia 52 58
Bahrain 28 39Germany 43 55Jordan 9 14Kuwait 35 48Mexico 34 45Nigeria 39 48Qatar 41 53Samoa 40 23
Source: World Bank
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   208 24/01/18   11:19 AMMeasuring unemployment
209The claimant count measures the number of people who are out of work and 
claiming unemployment benefi  ts. To qualify for benefi  ts, they must prove they are 
actively seeking employment. Critics of this measurement argue that the claimant count underestimates the true level of unemployment, because many people are not eligible for unemployment benefi  ts, such as those who are only seeking part-time work or people on job retraining schemes.
The labour force survey (LFS) is an alternative measure of unemployment produced 
by the ILO. It uses a standardised household-based survey to collect work-related statistics, such as employment status, education and training opportunities. The LFS is used by all member states of the European Union and other countries too. Questionnaires are collected face-to-face or completed over the telephone.
The ILO measures a country’s unemployment based on the number of people 
who are:
» willing to work, but unable to fi  nd it
» actively looking for work — that is, they have looked for a job in the last 4 
weeks, and
» able to start work within the next 2 weeks, or
» waiting to start a new job within the next 2 weeks.
▲ Job-seekers look at employment advertisements at a labour market in China
To measure unemployment, economists calculate the unemployment rate, which shows the proportion of the country’s workforce (those of working age) that is unemployed. It is calculated by the formula:
Number of unemployed
Workforce  × 100
Alternatively, this can be expressed as:
Number of unemployed
Number of unemployed + employed + self employed × 100
Deﬁ  nitions
The claimant count 
measures the number of people who are out of work and claiming unemployment benefi  ts.The labour force survey uses the ILO’s standardised household-based survey to collect work-related statistics.
Deﬁ  nition
The unemployment rate is a measure of the 
percentage of a country’s workforce that is out of employment.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   209 24/01/18   11:19 AM30	employmen T	and	unemploymen T
210Exam-style questions
1 Calculate the unemployment rate if the population is 65 million people,  
of whom 36 million are employed and 4 million are unemployed.  [2]
2 Calculate the number of unemployed people in a country with the  following population data and an unemployment rate of 8.5 per cent:
 [2]
• Population = 46 million
• Age 0–14 = 17 million
• Age 15–64 = 20 million
• Age ≥ 65 = 9 million
3 Having a population of over 188 million, Nigeria is one of the most populated countries in Africa. With over 42 per cent of the population aged below 15, the country has a large dependency ratio of almost 86 per cent. Gender inequalities mean less than 45 per cent of working-age females are in employment. Most people are employed in primary industries. Nigeria is a large producer of crude oil, with about 90 per cent of its export earnings coming from the sale of oil. Figure 30.2 shows the unemployment rates in Nigeria between 2013 and 2017.
2013 2014 2015 20166%
8101214
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 30.2 Nigeria’s unemployment rate, 2013–17
A Describe the changing pattern of employment in Nigeria from 2013  
to 2017.  [2]
B Nigeria’s working population is around 87.7 million. With an  unemployment rate of 13.9 per cent, calculate the number of  unemployed people in the country.
 [2] 
C Explain two possible factors contributing to the trend described in part a . [4]
4 According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Pakistan’s annual unemployment rate between 2012 and 2017 was kept steady at between 5.9 and 6.5 per cent. This, according to the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), meant that Pakistan’s gross domestic product grew by 4 per cent in 2015 and another 4.7 per cent in 2016. These changes have helped to reduce some of the poverty in Pakistan.A
 Explain why it might be difficult at times to know the exact rate of unemployment in a country.
 [4]
B Analyse the possible consequences of low unemployment for  the Pakistani economy.
 [6]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   210 24/01/18   11:19 AMCauses and types of unemployment
211Causes and types of unemployment
Several causes of unemployment are covered in the Cambridge International 
syllabus. These causes can be explained by examining the various types of unemployment.
» Frictional unemployment is transitional unemployment which occurs when people change jobs due to the time delay between leaving a job and fi  nding or starting a new one. Therefore, frictional unemployment always exists in the economy because it takes time for the labour market to match available jobs with the people looking for jobs.
» Structural unemployment occurs when the demand for products produced in a particular industry continually falls, often due to foreign competition. The industry therefore suffers from structural and long-term changes in demand for its products. The UK, for example, has suffered from structural unemployment in shipping, textiles, steel production, coal mining and car manufacturing. Those who have become unemployed after working in such industries usually fi  nd it quite diffi  cult to fi  nd a new job, so retraining is needed.
» Cyclical unemployment, also known as demand-defi  cient unemployment, is the most severe type of unemployment as it can affect every industry in the economy. It is caused by a lack of demand which causes a fall in national income. In Figure 30.3, the fall in demand in the economy from AD
1 
to AD2 causes national income to fall from Y 1 to Y 2, therefore creating mass 
unemployment and causing the general price level to fall from P 1 to P 2. 
Demand-defi  cient unemployment is experienced during an economic downturn — 
that is, during recessions and slumps.
National incomeY2 Y1General price
level ($)P1
AD2AD1AS
P2
O
▲ Figure 30.3 Cyclical unemployment
Activity 
Find real-world examples of frictional, seasonal and cyclical unemployment, with an 
image or picture to represent each type of unemployment.
Activity 
Find real-world examples of frictional, seasonal and cyclical unemployment, with an 
image or picture to represent each type of unemployment.
While Spain and Greece saw record unemployment rates of 21.9 per cent and 
24.9 per cent respectively in 2017, these are relatively modest compared to the countries with the world’s highest unemployment rates (see Table 30.3).
Deﬁ  nitions
Frictional unemployment 
is transitional unemployment which occurs when people change jobs or are in-between jobs.Structural unemployment occurs when the demand for products produced in a particular industry continually falls, often due to foreign competition.Cyclical unemployment is unemployment caused by a lack of demand, which causes a fall in national income. It is a severe type of unemployment as it can affect every industry in the economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   211 24/01/18   11:19 AM30	 employmenT	and	unemploymenT
212Table 30.3 The world’s highest unemployment, 2017
Ranking Country Average unemployment rate (%)
1 Djibouti 53.9
2 Solomon Islands 34.8
3 Mauritius 31.1
4 Bosnia and Herzegovina 30.3
5 The Gambia 30.1
Source: The Heritage Foundation, 2017
Activity 
Find out the current unemployment rate in your country or a country of your choice. 
How does this compare with the rates for the past fi  ve years? A good starting point is www.tradingeconomics.com or the website of the International Labour Organization (www.ilo.org). What trends can you identify? Investigate the possible causes of these unemployment trends.
Activity 
Find out the current unemployment rate in your country or a country of your choice. 
How does this compare with the rates for the past fi  ve years? A good starting point is 
Consequences of unemployment
Unemployment affects a range of stakeholders: the individuals who are 
unemployed themselves, fi  rms (employers) and the economy as a whole. The consequences of unemployment include the following:
» The individuals who are unemployed may suffer from stress, depression, other 
health problems, low self-esteem, a lack of dignity and homelessness. In extreme cases, unemployment can even lead to suicides.
» Family and friends may also suffer from lower incomes as a result of 
unemployment. This often leads to arguments and even separation or divorce.
» The local community can suffer if there is mass unemployment, as a result 
of poverty, falling house prices (and hence asset values) and increased crime rates.
» Firms lose out as there are lower levels of consumer spending, investment and 
profi  ts. Business failures and bankruptcies are therefore more likely to occur during periods of high unemployment.
» The government may face higher expenditure on welfare benefi  ts and 
healthcare for the unemployed. Hence, prolonged periods of high unemployment can lead to increased government debts.
» Taxpayers stand to lose due to the opportunity costs of unemployment — 
namely, increased reliance on taxpayer’s money to fi  nance unemployment and welfare benefi  ts.
» The economy as a whole suffers from being less internationally competitive due 
to falling levels of spending and national output.
Policies to reduce unemployment
Governments can try to deal with the problems of unemployment in a number of ways. This will partly depend on the causes of unemployment in the economy. There are four general policies for reducing unemployment: fiscal 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   212 24/01/18   11:19 AMPolicies to reduce unemployment
213policy (see Chapter 26), monetary policy (see Chapter 27), supply-side policy  
(see Chapter 28) and protectionist policies (see Chapter 37).
» Fiscal policy — this is the use of taxation and government spending 
policies to influence the level of economic activity. It can be used to tackle unemployment caused by demand-side issues, such as cyclical and structural unemployment. The use of expansionary fiscal policy (such as tax cuts and increased government spending) boosts the level of consumption and investment in the economy. This causes an increase in real GDP, which brings about more employment opportunities.
» Monetary policy — this refers to the use of interest rates to affect the level of economic activity. When interest rates are lowered, the cost of borrowing falls, thus encouraging households and firms to spend and invest. In Figure 30.4,  higher spending in the economy shifts the demand for labour curve from D
L1 
to D L2. This results in employment in the economy increasing from N 1 to N 2. 
The resulting rise in real wage rates from W 1 to W 2 also helps to attract more 
labour, causing an expansion along the supply of labour (S L) curve. Like fiscal 
policy, monetary policy tackles demand-side causes of unemployment.
Employment of labour ( N)N1N2Real wage rate ( W)
W2
DL1DL2SL
W1
O
▲ Figure 30.4 Monetary policy and the labour market
» Protectionist measures such as tariffs and quotas (see Chapter 37) can be used to safeguard domestic jobs from the threat of international competition. For example, the Japanese government imposes up to 778 per cent import taxes on rice — the highest rate in the world — in order to protect agricultural jobs in the country.
» Supply-side policies — these government strategies are used to deal with imperfections in the labour market and to reduce unemployment caused by supply-side factors. Thus, these policies are aimed at addressing frictional and voluntary unemployment, although they can also be used to help reduce structural and cyclical unemployment. Examples of supply-side policies are as follows:–
 Investment in education and training helps unemployed people to gain new skills so they can find employment. An example is retraining structurally unemployed manufacturing workers to help them find work in the tertiary sector. Education and training expenditure should also help future generations to become more skilled and employable.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   213 24/01/18   11:19 AM30	employmen T	and	unemploymen T
214– A reduction in trade union powers will mean that labour unions are not in 
such a strong bargaining position to obtain higher wages (see Chapter 19). 
Strong trade unions have often been able to demand annual pay rises in excess of inflation. Hence, government intervention to reduce the influence and power of trade unions can help to reduce unemployment.
–
 Incentives can be offered to firms for training and hiring the long-term unemployed. For example, the government can offer tax allowances and/or subsidies to reduce the costs of training and hiring workers. Similarly, special economic zones could be set up in areas of high unemployment to create jobs. However, firms might be reluctant to do this because of the lower productivity and greater risks of hiring the long-term unemployed.
–
 Reducing welfare benefits will give unemployed people an incentive to find a job rather than to rely on state welfare benefits. If it is made more difficult for people to claim unemployment benefits, they become more proactive in searching for jobs. This could significantly help to reduce unemployment.
While supply-side policies tend to have more permanent impacts on employment, these effects take longer to achieve when compared to demand-side policies aimed at reducing unemployment in the economy.
Exam-style questions
In June 2010, Tesco opened Britain’s first supermarket without any checkout workers. Instead, one person was hired to supervise five self-service checkouts, mainly to assist customers who had not used a self-service checkout before. The UK’s largest retailer employs around 470,000 workers but critics argue that such technological advancements will cause mass job losses. In 2017, Tesco announced it would cut night-shift shelf stackers in some of its supermarkets, putting more jobs at risk.
a
 Define unemployment.  [2]
b Analyse the ways in which the UK government could reduce technological 
unemployment.  [6]
Exam-style question
Which option is least likely to suggest why it is difficult to compare the unemployment rates of different countries?
A
 Different countries calculate unemployment in different ways
B The minimum age to work differs in different countries
C The retirement age varies between countries
D There is no agreement on the measurement of unemployment
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   214 24/01/18   11:19 AMPolicies to reduce unemployment
215Chapter review questions
 1 How does the pattern of employment in the three employment sectors change as an 
economy develops?
 2 Why have most developed countries seen a delay in labour entering the workforce?
 3 How have ageing populations in developed economies affected employment 
patterns?
 4 How does the International Labour Organization measure unemployment?
 5 How is the unemployment rate calculated?
 6 Why is employment a macroeconomic objective of all governments?
 7 Outline the main types (and hence the causes) of unemployment.
 8 What are the consequences of high unemployment in the economy?
 9 What are the four main government policies that can be used to reduce domestic 
unemployment?
10 Give three examples of supply-side policies that can be used to reduce 
unemployment.
Revision checklist
✔ Employment refers to the economic use of labour as a factor of 
production, with people working in the primary, secondary and tertiary 
sectors of the economy.
✔ Unemployment occurs when people of working age are both willing and 
able to work but cannot ﬁ  nd employment.
✔ As a country develops, the number of people employed in the primary 
sector tends to fall, with the majority being employed in the tertiary sector .
✔ Changing employment patterns include: delayed entry into the 
workforce, ageing populations, higher female participation rates, a lower proportion of public sector employment and ﬂ  exible working patterns.
✔ Unemployment can be calculated using either the claimant count or the 
labour force survey.
✔ Types of unemployment include: frictional, structural and cyclical 
unemployment.
✔ Policies to tackle the problems of unemployment include: ﬁ  scal policy, 
monetary policy, protectionist measures and supply-side policies (for example, investment in education and training, a reduction in trade union power, creating incentives for ﬁ  rms to train and employ people, and reducing welfare beneﬁ  ts).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   215 24/01/18   11:19 AM216
 31  Inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation
Infl  ation and defl  ation
Infl  ation is the sustained rise in the general price level in an economy over time. 
This does not mean the price of every good and service increases, but on average prices are rising. 
Governments aim to control infl  ation because it reduces the value of money 
and the spending power of individuals, governments and fi  rms. For example, the infl  ation rate in Syria was around 51 per cent in 2017, meaning that the general price level in Syria increased by an average of about 51 per cent in a year. Hence, a product priced at 100 Syrian pounds would increase to 151 Syrian pounds by the end of the year. This makes conditions far less predictable for economic stability in Syria than in other countries with low and stable rates of infl  ation such as Canada, the UK and the USA (see Table 31.1).
Source: tradingeconomics.com; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
▲ Figure 31.1 The USA’s relatively stable infl  ation rates (2007–17)By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation
★ measure inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation using the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
★ discuss the causes of inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation
★ discuss the consequences of inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation
★ discuss the policies to control inﬂ  ation and deﬂ  ation.
Deﬁ  nition
Infl  ation is the sustained 
rise in the general level of prices of goods and services over time, as measured by a consumer price index.
Table 31.1 Infl  ation rates around the world, selected countries 2017
Country Infl  ation 
rate (%)
Venezuela 741.00
South Sudan 425.90Suriname  48.70Sudan  33.50Mozambique  21.57Rwanda  13.00Iran  11.90Ethiopia   8.50Brazil   4.57USA   2.40UK   2.30
Canada   1.60Singapore   0.70Switzerland   0.60
Source: www.
tradingeconomics.com
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016–4–20246
–4–20246
Case study: Hyperinflation in Zimbabwe
Major economic problems in Zimbabwe caused the country to suffer from extortionate 
rates of infl  ation between 2003 and 2009. In June 2006, the Central Bank introduced a new 100,000 Zimbabwean dollar banknote (less than $1 back then). However, by July 2008, infl  ation had reached a whopping 231,000,000 per cent! Several months later in January 2009, the Zimbabwean government launched the 100 trillion Zimbabwean dollar banknote (ZWD100,000,000,000,000)! This meant the currency became worthless, and was eventually abandoned. Today, the southern African country still does not have its own offi  cial currency, with many preferring to use the US dollar. With GDP per capita at $487 (around $1.33 per day), around 80 per cent of the country’s 12.6 million people live in extreme poverty.
Deﬁ  nition
Hyperinfl  ation refers to 
very high rates of infl  ation that are out of control, causing average prices in the economy to rise very rapidly.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   216 24/01/18   11:19 AMInflation and deflation
217Deﬂ  ation
Whilst the price of goods and services tends to rise, the price of some 
products actually falls over time. This is perhaps due to technological progress or a fall in consumer demand for the product, both of which can cause prices to fall. Deflation is defined as the persistent fall in the general price level of goods and services in the economy, i.e. the inflation rate is negative. Some of the countries that experienced deflation in 2017 are shown in Table 31.2.
The causes of deﬂ  ation can be categorised as either demand or supply 
factors. Deﬂ  ation is a concern if it is caused by falling demand for goods and services (often associated with an economic recession and rising levels of unemployment).
Deflation can be caused by higher levels of supply of goods and services, 
thus increasing the productive capacity of the economy. This drives down the general price level of goods and services whilst increasing national income. Such deflation is called benign deflation (non-threatening deflation). For example, supply-side policies such as investment in education and infrastructure (see Chapter 28), higher productivity, improved managerial practices, technological advances or government subsidies for major industries all help to raise national income in the long run. A greater level of capacity in the economy helps to reduce the general price level. This has happened in China during the past three decades with the Chinese government pouring huge amounts of investment funds into building new roads and rail networks (the country plans to spend $503 billion on railway expansion by 2020!).
Deﬂ  ation can also be caused by lower levels of demand in the ec onomy, thus 
driving down the general price level of goods and services due to excess capacity in the economy. This causes malign deﬂ  ation (deﬂ  ation that is harmful to the 
economy). For example, during an economic recession, household consumption of goods and services falls due to lower GDP per capita and higher levels of unemployment. A fall in the level of demand in the economy reduces the national income, forcing down the general price level. This happened in Greece for much of the past decade as the economy has struggled to get out of a severe recession. This cause of deﬂ  ation is a concern as it is associated with a decline in national income and standards of living.Exam-style questions
The hypothetical data below shows the inﬂ  ation rates for a country over three years.
Year 1 2 3
Inﬂ  ation rate (%) 2.5 1.7 2.3
a Deﬁ  ne the meaning of ‘inﬂ  ation rate’.  [2]
b Explain why the rate of inﬂ  ation was at its highest in the third year.  [4]
Deﬁ  nition
Deﬂ  ation is the sustained 
fall in the general price level in an economy over time, i.e. the inﬂ  ation rate is negative.
Table 31.2 Deﬂ  ation rates around the world, 2017
Country Deﬂ  ation 
rate (%)
Somalia -3.5
Chad -3.1Seychelles -1.2Benin -1.0Iraq -0.8
Barbados -0.5Togo -0.4Saudi Arabia -0.4Aruba -0.3
Source: www.
tradingeconomics.com
Study tip
The extent to which an 
economy is affected by   deﬂ  ation will depend on the severity of deﬂ  ation. Morocco’s experience of zero rate inﬂ  ation in 2017 would have been very different from Somalia’s -3.5 per cent inﬂ  ation rate in the same year.Study tip
Low rates of inﬂ  ation, of 
one or two per cent, are not usually harmful to the economy as higher prices can encourage ﬁ  rms to supply more output. It is when inﬂ  ation rises too quickly that it can disrupt decision making for individuals, ﬁ  rms and governments.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   217 06/02/18   12:54 PM31	 inflaTion	and	deflaTion
2182008 2010 2012Greece inflation rate
2014 2016–4–20246
–4–20246
 Source: tradingeconomics.com; National Statistical Service of Greece
▲ Figure 31.2 Greece infl  ation rate
Case study: Swine flu H1N1
In 2009 the world suffered from a pandemic of swine fl  u, a highly contagious respiratory 
disease caused by the H1N1 infl  uenza virus found in pigs but with the potential to affect humans. The outbreak of the infectious disease in Northern Ireland, the USA, China and India slowed down economic activity to the extent that it caused defl  ation in all four countries, and falling rates of infl  ation in other affected nations such as Australia, the Philippines and Britain.
Measuring infl  ation and defl  ation
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is a common method used to calculate the 
infl  ation rate. It measures price changes of a representative basket of goods and services (those consumed by an average household) in the country. For example, items such as staple food products, clothing, petrol and transportation are likely to be included. However, different statistical weights are applied to refl  ect the relative importance of the average household’s expenditure. For example, a 10 per cent increase in the price of petrol will affect the average household far more than a 50 per cent increase in the price of light bulbs, batteries or bananas. Changes in the CPI therefore represent changes in the cost of living for the average household in the economy.
The statistical weights in the CPI are therefore based on the proportion of an 
average household’s spending on the items in the representative basket of goods and services. For example, if food items account for 15 per cent of the typical household’s total spending, then 15 per cent of the weights in the index would be assigned to food items. Therefore, items of expenditure that take a greater proportion of the typical household’s spending are assigned a larger weighting. Changing fashions and trends, such as greater household expenditure on smartphones, online apps and tablet computers, require a review (or update) on the weights in the CPI.
The CPI is used for international comparisons of infl  ation rates, partly because 
it uses a wide sample of the population when calculating and assigning statistical weights to the index. The CPI, as the key measure of infl  ation for most countries, is also important as a benchmark when central banks set interest rates (see Chapter 27).
Deﬁ  nition
The Consumer Price Index 
(CPI) is a weighted index of consumer prices in the economy over time. It is used to measure the cost of living for an average household.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   218 24/01/18   11:19 AMMeasuring inflation and deflation
219Calculating the CPI
A price index is used to indicate the average percentage change in prices 
compared to a starting period called the base year. The CPI compares the price index of buying a representative basket of goods and services with the base year, which is assigned a value of 100. Hence, a price index of 115.2 means that prices have in general increased by 15.2 per cent since the base year. If prices were to rise by another 5 per cent in the subsequent year, the price index number would become 120.96 (i.e. 115.2 × 1.05), or 20.96 per cent higher since the base year. Price changes in the CPI are measured on a monthly basis but reported for a twelve-month period.
Calculating changes in the CPI will give the rate of infl  ation. To do so, two 
steps are involved:
» Collection of the price data for a representative basket of goods and services, 
collected on a monthly basis.
» Assigning the statistical weights, representing different patterns of spending 
over time.
The simplifi  ed example below, with three products in the representative basket, shows how a CPI is calculated. Assume 2016 is the base year, when the total basket price was $20.
Product Price in 2017 Price in 2018
Pizza $9 $10
Cinema ticket $10 $11
Petrol $3 $3.5
Total basket price $22.0 $24.5
To calculate the infl  ation rate between 2017 and 2018, fi  rst calculate the price indices for the two years in question:
» 2017: $22/$20 × 100 = 110 (prices in 2017 were 10 per cent higher on average 
than in 2016).
» 2018: $24.5/$20 × 100 = 122.5 (prices in 2018 were 22.5 per cent higher on 
average than in 2016).
The infl  ation rate between 2017 and 2018 is the percentage change in the price indices during these two periods:
(122.5 – 110)
110 × 100 = 11.36%.
However, the products measured in the CPI are of different degrees of importance to the typical household, so statistical weights are applied to refl  ect this. Suppose, for example, in a particular country, food consumption accounts for 40 per cent of the average household spending, whereas entertainment represents 20 per cent, transport represents 25 per cent and all other items of expenditure represent the remaining 15 per cent. To create a weighted price index, economists multiply the price index for each item of expenditure (in the representative basket of goods and services) by the statistical weight for each item. Applying these weights gives the following results:
Deﬁ  nition
The base year refers to 
the starting year when calculating a price index.
Table 31.3 Calculating the total basket price
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   219 24/01/18   11:19 AM31	 inflaTion	and	deflaTion
220Product Price index Weight Weighted index
Food 110.0 0.40 110 × 0.4 = 44.0
Entertainment 115.0 0.20 115 × 0.2 = 23.0
Transport 116.4 0.25 116.4 × 0.25 = 29.1
Others 123.3 0.15 123.3 × 0.15 = 18.5
Weighted index 114.6
Whilst the price of food has increased the least since the base year (by only 10 
per cent), food accounts for 40 per cent of the typical household’s spending. So, this 10 per cent price increase has a much larger impact on the cost of living than the 15 per cent increase in the price of entertainment, which accounts for only 20 per cent of the average household’s expenditure. Without using weights, the average price index would be 116.18, i.e. (110 + 115 + 116.4 + 123.3) / 4. However, the statistical weights reduce the price index to 114.6 because the relatively higher prices of non-food items account for a smaller proportion of spending by the typical household. This shows that prices have, on average, increased by 14.6 per cent since the base year. Therefore, the use of a weighted price index is more accurate in measuring changes in the cost of living, and hence infl  ation.
Activity
a Calculate the infl  ation rate if the consumer price index changes from 123.0 to 129.15.
b Calculate the price index if there is 3.0 per cent infl  ation during the year if the index 
was previously at 130.
c Calculate how much a basket of goods and services which is currently priced at 
$1,200 would cost if the CPI increased from 125 to 135.
Activity
a
 Calculate the infl  ation rate if the consumer price index changes from 123.0 to 129.15.
b
 Calculate the price index if there is 3.0 per cent infl  ation during the year if the index 
Exam-style questions
The data below is for a hypothetical country, Jukeland.
Item Consumer Price Index Weight
Clothing 110 10
Food 120 20
Housing 130 30
Others 140 40
a Defi  ne what is meant by a ‘consumer price index (CPI)’.  [2]
b ‘The typical household in Jukeland spends more money on housing than 
on food or clothing’. Explain this statement.  [4]Study tip
Although the CPI is the 
most widely used price index for measuring infl  ation, it only takes an average measure. Thus, the CPI hides the fact that the price of some products increases more rapidly than others, whilst the price of other products might have actually fallen.
Causes of infl  ation and defl  ation
There are two main causes of infl  ation: demand-pull infl  ation and cost-push 
infl  ation. Cost-push infl  ation is caused by higher costs of production, which makes 
fi  rms raise their prices in order to maintain their profi  t margins. For example, higher Table 31.4 Creating a 
weighted price index
Deﬁ  nition
Cost-push infl  ation is a cause of infl  ation, triggered by higher costs of production, thus forcing up prices.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   220 24/01/18   11:19 AMCauses of inflation and deflation
221raw material costs, increased wages, and soaring rents causes economic activity 
to fall, thereby reducing real national income.
▲ Higher rents in popular locations can cause cost-push infl  ation
Demand-pull infl  ation is caused by higher levels of demand (total demand in the economy), thus driving up the general price level of goods and services. For example, during an economic boom, household consumption of goods and services increases due to higher GDP per capita and higher levels of employment. This causes an increase in real national income but forces up the general price level in the economy.
Exam-style questions
1 Which option would not cause demand-pull infl  ation? [1]
A Higher interest rates to make borrowing more diffi  cultB Higher level of consumer and producer confi  dence in the economyC Increase in government spendingD Reduction in direct taxes
2 What is unlikely to cause cost-push infl  ation? [1]
A A reduction in indirect taxesB An increase in demand for exportsC Higher interest ratesD Increase in raw material costs
Other possible causes of infl  ation are:
» Monetary causes of infl  ation are related to increases in the money supply (see case study on Zimbabwe) and easier access to credit, such as loans and credit cards.
» Imported infl  ation occurs due to higher import prices, forcing up costs of production and therefore causing domestic infl  ation.
Deﬁ  nition
Demand-pull infl  ation is a 
cause of infl  ation, triggered by higher levels of demand in the economy, thus driving up the general price level.
Deﬁ  nition
Imported infl  ation is a cause of infl  ation triggered by higher import prices, forcing up costs of production and thus causing domestic infl  ation.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   221 24/01/18   11:19 AM31	 inflaTion	and	deflaTion
222Exam-style questions
Study the graph below which shows the infl  ation rates in India between 2003 
and 2013, and answer the questions that follow.
Source: tradingeconomics.com; Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MOSPI), India
a Identify when the rate of infl  ation was at its highest and lowest in India.  [2]b Explain the difference between cost-push infl  ation and demand-pull infl  ation.  [4]c Analyse why the global fi  nancial crisis of late 2008 would have caused a 
fall in India’s rate of infl  ation.  [6]–2
Jan/04 Jan/06 Jan/08 Jan/10 Jan/12024681012
–2024681012% change in consumer price index
Activity 
Discuss in small groups 
of 2–3 people the economic strategies you would use to control demand-pull infl  ation and cost-push infl  ation. You may want to refer to Chapters 26 and 27 to help with this activity.
Activity 
Discuss in small groups 
Consequences of infl  ation and defl  ation
Consequences of infl  ation
Infl  ation can complicate planning and decision making for households, fi  rms and 
governments with many consequences as outlined below.
» Menu costs — Infl  ation impacts on the prices charged by fi  rms. Catalogues, price 
lists and menus have to be updated regularly and this is costly to businesses. Of course, workers also have to be paid for their time to reprice goods and services.
» Consumers — The purchasing power of consumers goes down when there is 
infl  ation, i.e. there is a fall in their real income because money is worth less than before. Therefore, as the cost of living increases, consumers need more money to buy the same amount of goods and services.
» Shoe leather costs — Infl  ation causes fl  uctuations in price levels so customers 
spend more time searching for the best deals. This might be done by physically visiting different fi  rms to fi  nd the cheapest supplier or searching online. Shoe leather costs therefore represent an opportunity cost for customers.
» Savers — Savers, be they individuals, fi  rms or governments, will lose out from 
infl  ation, assuming there is no change in interest rates for savings. This is because the money they have saved is worth less than before. For example, if interest rates average 2 per cent for savings accounts in a country but its infl  ation rate is 3 per cent, then the real interest rate on savings is actually minus 1 per cent. Hence, infl  ation can act as a disincentive to save. In turn, this leads to fewer funds being made available for investment in the economy.
» Lenders — Lenders, be they individuals, fi  rms or governments, will also lose 
from infl  ation. This is because the money lent out to borrowers becomes worth less than before due to infl  ation.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   222 24/01/18   11:19 AMConsequences of inflation and deflation
223» Borrowers  — By contrast, borrowers tend to gain from inflation as the money 
they need to repay is worth less than when they initially borrowed it, i.e. the 
real value of their debt declines due to inflation. For example, if a borrower took out a mortgage at 5 per cent interest but inflation was 3.5 per cent, this means the real interest rate is only 1.5 per cent.
» Fixed income earners — During periods of inflation, fixed income earners (such as salaried workers and pensioners whose income does not change with their level of output) see a fall in their real income. Thus, they are worse off than before as the purchasing power of their fixed income declines with higher prices. Even if employees receive a pay rise, the rate of inflation reduces the real value of this. For example, if workers get a 4 per cent pay rise but inflation is 3 per cent, then the real pay increase is only 1 per cent.
» Low income earners — Inflation harms the poorest members of society far more than those in high incomes. Low income earners tend to have a high price elasticity of demand (see Chapter 11) for goods and services. By contrast, those on high incomes and accumulated wealth such as hip-hop artists (see Table 31.5) are not so affected by higher prices.
» Exporters — The international competitiveness of a country will tend to fall when there is domestic inflation. In the long run, higher prices make exporters less price-competitive, thus causing a drop in profits. This leads to a fall in export earnings, lower economic growth and higher unemployment.
» Importers — Imports become more expensive for individuals, firms and the government due to the decline in the purchasing power of money. Essential imports such as petroleum and food products can cause imported inflation (higher import prices, forcing up costs of production and thus causing domestic inflation). Hence, inflation can cause problems for countries without many natural resources.Exam-style questions
Study the following data and answer the questions that follow.
Year Inflation rate (%) Wage increase (%)
1 2.5 3.0
2 3.1 3.5
3 2.9 3.1
a Describe which year saw the largest increase in real wages.  [2]
b Explain why average wages were higher in Year 3 than Year 2.  [2]
Table 31.5 The five wealthiest hip-hop artists
Rank Artist Net wealth ($m)
1 Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs 750
2 Andre ‘Dr Dre’ Young 710
3 Shawn ‘Jay-Z’ Carter 610
4 Bryan ‘Birdman’ Williams 110
5 Aubrey ‘Drake’ Graham  60
Source: Forbes  Rich List 2016
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   223 24/01/18   11:19 AM31	 inflaTion	and	deflaTion
224» Employers  — Workers are likely to demand a pay rise during times of infl  ation 
in order to maintain their level of real income. As a result, labour costs of 
production rise and, other things being equal, profi  ts margins would fall. Those in highly skilled professions such as surgeons, doctors, pilots and barristers are in a strong bargaining position because their skills are in short supply and in high demand. This can create a wage-price spiral whereby demand for higher wages to keep in line with infl  ation simply causes more infl  ation. Infl  ation also harms employers located in expensive areas. Table 31.6 shows the world’s most expensive cities, which means employers in these areas have to pay relatively high wages to attract workers. For example, Tokyo has been the most expensive city in the annual Economics Intelligence Unit (EIU) Worldwide Cost of Living Index a total of 14 times in the past 20 years.
» Business confi  dence levels — Infl  ation also affects employers as it causes 
uncertainty. The combination of uncertainty and the lower than expected real rates of return on investment (due to higher costs of production) tends to lower the amount of planned investment in the economy.
The consequences of defl  ation
The consequences of defl  ation depend on whether we are considering benign defl  ation or malign defl  ation. The consequences of benign defl  ation are positive as the economy is able to produce more, thus boosting national income and employment, without an increase in the general price level. This therefore boosts the international competitiveness of the country. However, malign defl  ation is generally harmful to the economy. The consequences of malign defl  ation include 
the following:
» Unemployment — As defl  ation usually occurs due to a fall in demand for 
goods and services in the economy, this causes a fall in the demand for labour, i.e. defl  ation causes job losses in the economy.
» Bankruptcies — During periods of defl  ation, consumers spend less so fi  rms 
tend to have lower sales revenues and profi  ts. This makes it more diffi  cult for fi  rms to repay their costs and liabilities (money owed to others, such as outstanding loans and mortgages). Thus, defl  ation can cause a large number of bankruptcies in the economy.
» Wealth effect — As the profi  ts of fi  rms fall, so do their valuations, i.e. share 
prices fall during times of defl  ation. This means that dividends and the capital returns on holding shares fall, thus reducing the wealth of shareholders.
» Debt effect — The real cost of debts (borrowing) increases when there is 
defl  ation. This is because real interest rates rise when the price level falls. For example, if interest rates average 1.0 per cent but the infl  ation rate is –1.5 per cent, then the real interest rate is 2.5 per cent (imagine the situation of falling house prices whilst having to pay interest on mortgages taken out when prices were higher). Thus, with defl  ation and the subsequent rising real value of debts, both consumer and business confi  dence levels fall, further adding to the economic problems in the country.
» Government debt — With more bankruptcies, unemployment and lower 
levels of economic activity, tax revenues fall whilst the amount of government spending rises (due to the economic decline associated with malign infl  ation). This creates a budget defi  cit for the government, meaning that it needs to borrow money even though the real cost of borrowing rises with defl  ation.
Deﬁ  nition
A wage-price spiral 
occurs when trade unions negotiate higher wages to keep income in line with infl  ation but this simply causes more infl  ation as fi  rms raise prices to maintain their profi  t margins.
▲ Singapore tops the most 
expensive cities index
Table 31.6 The world’s most 
expensive cities
Rank City
1 Singapore
2 Hong Kong
3 Zurich, Switzerland4 Tokyo, Japan5 Osaka, Japan6 Seoul, South Korea7 Geneva,expensive cities index
Table 31.6 The world’s most 
expensive cities
Rank City
1 Singapore
2 Hong Kong
3 Zurich, Switzerland4 Tokyo, Japan5 Osaka, Japan6 Seoul, South Korea7 Geneva, 
Switzerland
7 Paris, France9 New York, USA9 Copenhagen, 
Denmark
Source: EIU: Worldwide Cost 
of Living Index, 2017
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   224 24/01/18   11:19 AMConsequences of inflation and deflation
225» Consumer confi  dence — Defl  ation usually causes a fall in consumer confi  dence 
levels as consumers fear things will get worse for the economy. Thus, they may 
postpone their spending, especially on consumer durable goods such as cars and furniture, as they expect prices to fall even further in the future or they will wait until the economy improves. This clearly does not help the economy to recover, thereby causing a downwards defl  ationary spiral.
Exam-style questions
1 Over the past decade, Japan has suffered from periods of defl  ation (see chart).
Source: tradingeconomics.com; Ministry of International Affairs & Communications, Japan
a Defi  ne the term defl  ation. [2]
b Explain what evidence there is in the chart to suggest that Japan has 
suffered periods of defl  ation during the past 10 years. [4]
c Analyse the impact of prolonged defl  ation for the Japanese economy. [6]
2 Iran’s infl  ation rate climbed above 30 per cent in 2013, having reached 31.5 
per cent at the end of the Islamic country’s calendar year. The country, with a population of 74.8 million, had experienced double-digit infl  ation rates for most of the past decade. At the end of 2010, the government reduced food and fuel subsidies, thereby fuelling infl  ation. In addition, international sanctions due to Iran’s disputed nuclear programme forced down the value of the Iranian rial, the country’s offi  cial currency. This added pressure on higher prices in the economy.
Period Infl  ation (%)
March 2012 26.4
Dec 2012 27.4March 2013 31.5
a With reference to the data above, explain why prices in Iran were 
generally higher in 2013 than in 2012.  [4]
b Explain two reasons why the Iranian government might aim to control 
the level of infl  ation in its economy.  [4]
c Analyse how some Iranians are likely to have been more affected than 
others by the double-digit infl  ation rates.  [6]2008 2010 2012 2014 2016–4–202
Variance
Mean4
–4–2024
Source: Reuters (http://goo.gl/2yGLB)
Activity 
Discuss the impact of an increase in oil prices on the rate of infl  ation in your country or 
a country of your choice. Which stakeholders are affected the most? Why?
Activity 
Discuss the impact of an increase in oil prices on the rate of infl  ation in your country or 
a country of your choice. Which stakeholders are affected the most? Why?
Study tip
A fall in the rate of infl  ation 
(known as disinfl  ation) means that prices are still rising, only at a slower rate. Be clear about the meaning of defl  ation — an actual fall in the general price level. Refl  ation is the opposite of disinfl  ation, which occurs when the rate of infl  ation increases.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   225 24/01/18   11:19 AM31	infla Tion	and	defla Tion
226Policies to control inflation and deflation
Inflation can be controlled by using macroeconomic policies to slow down the 
growth of demand in the economy and/or boost the rate of growth of the economy’s overall supply of goods and services. These policies include the following.
Fiscal policy
Fiscal policy involves the use of taxation and/or government spending to control the level of economic activity in the economy. If the general level of demand in the economy is too high (causing demand-pull inflation), the government may choose to ‘tighten fiscal policy’ by raising taxes and/or reducing its own expenditure in order to reduce the level of economic activity.
During times of deflation, it can be very difficult to break out of a downward 
deflationary spiral. To do so would require a significant boost to demand in the economy. The government may choose to cut direct taxes, leading to an increase in real incomes and thus greater levels of demand. This should result in higher levels of economic activity, which has a positive effect on employment and economic growth.
See Chapter 26 to read about fiscal policy.
Monetary policy
Monetary policy involves the central bank changing interest rates in order to control the level of economic activity. For example, higher interest rates may reduce consumer and investment expenditure as the cost of borrowing (to fund household spending and business investments) soars.
Lower interest rates can also be used to control deflation as the cut in interest 
rates reduces the exchange rate, ceteris paribus. This is because foreign investors receive a lower return on their investments. The resulting fall in the exchange rate brings about a fall in the price of imports and hence an increase in the demand for exports.
See Chapter 27 to read about monetary policy.
Supply-side policies
Whilst both fiscal and monetary policies target the demand side of the economy in order to tackle the issue of inflation or deflation, supply-side policies are used to increase the economy’s productive capacity. These policies seek to increase competition, productivity and innovation in order to maintain lower prices. Some countries, such as Iran and France, have used subsidies for food and fuel to reduce prices in the economy.
A reduction in corporate tax rates can also encourage risk-taking and 
greater investment. Countries that do not charge any corporate tax include Bahrain, the Bahamas, the Cayman Islands, the Isle of Man and the United Arab Emirates.
In the short run, fiscal and monetary policies are used to control inflation or 
deflation. In the long run, supply-side policies boost the productive capacity of the economy, thereby giving it flexibility to grow without suffering from the costs of inflation.
See Chapter 28 to read about supply-side policy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   226 24/01/18   11:19 AMPolicies to control inflation and deflation
227Chapter review questions
 1 What is meant by infl  ation?
 2 What is the Consumer Price Index?
 3 Why are weights used in the calculation of the CPI?
 4 What is a base year?
 5 What are the two key causes of infl  ation?
 6 Outline the main consequences of infl  ation.
 7 What is defl  ation?
 8 What are the two main causes of defl  ation?
 9 Outline the main consequences of defl  ation.
10 What policies can be used to deal with infl  ation and defl  ation?
Revision checklist
In this chapter you have learned:
✔ Inﬂ  ation is the sustained rise in the general price level in an economy 
over time.
✔ Deﬂ  ation is the persistent fall in the general price level of goods and 
services in the economy, i.e. the inﬂ  ation rate is negative.
✔ The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is used to calculate the inﬂ  ation rate by 
measuring price changes of a representative basket of goods and services.
✔ Cost-push inﬂ  ation is caused by higher costs of production, which makes 
ﬁ  rms raise their prices in order to maintain their proﬁ  t margins.
✔ Demand-pull inﬂ  ation is caused by higher levels of total demand in the 
economy, thus driving up the general price level of goods and services.
✔ Costs of inﬂ  ation include: menu costs, shoe leather costs, lower 
consumer and business conﬁ  dence, and reduced international 
competitiveness (as exports become more expensive).
✔ Losers of inﬂ  ation include: consumers, lenders, savers, ﬁ  xed income 
earners, low income earners, exporters and employers.
✔ Winners of inﬂ  ation include: borrowers and importers.
✔ The consequences of deﬂ  ation include: unemployment, bankruptcies, 
negative wealth effect, declining conﬁ  dence levels and higher debt burdens.
✔ Policies to tackle inﬂ  ation include: deﬂ  ationary ﬁ  scal policies, tight 
monetary policies and supply-side policies.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-04.indd   227 24/01/18   11:19 AMThis page intentionally left blank229
SECTION 5
Economic 
development
Chapters
32 Living standards
33 Poverty34 Population35 Differences in economic development between 
countries
This section of the syllabus explores the important concept of economic development, in the pursuit of improved standards of living. Indicators of living standards are examined, namely real GDP per capita and the Human Development Index (HDI). As an economy develops, there are variations in the size and composition of its population. The causes of poverty are studied together with economic policies to alleviate it and to redistribute income. Finally, there is an examination of the reasons for the differences in economic development between countries, such as: population growth; the relative size of the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors; levels of saving and investment; education; and healthcare.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   229 24/01/18   11:18 AM230
 32  Living standards
Indicators of living standards
Economists believe that sustained economic growth is an important 
macroeconomic objective (see Chapter 29) because it is the most practical measure of the standard of living in a country. This refers to the social and economic wellbeing of individuals in a country at a particular point in time. For example, China’s phenomenal economic growth over the past three decades (see Figure 32.1) has led to an increase in living standards for the majority of its population. With an average growth rate of 10 per cent per year, the income of the average Chinese citizen would have doubled every seventh year.
1995 1990 2000 2005 2010 20152%
4681016
1214
Source: Trading Economics 
▲ Figure 32.1 China’s economic growth rate, 1989–2017
The two main measures or indicators of living standards are GDP per capita (or 
GDP per person) and the Human Development Index (HDI).
Components of real GDP per capita
As a single measure of standards of living, real GDP is perhaps the best indicator. Higher real GDP means that people have more to spend on goods and services. Real GDP is also relatively easy for economists to calculate.
One problem in using GDP fi  gures (see Chapter 29) to measure standards of 
living is that the size of the population is ignored. For example, China’s GDP is signifi  cantly larger than that of Luxembourg or Sweden. However, China’s much larger population means that Sweden and Luxembourg’s GDP per head of the population is greater (see Table 32.1). Hence, GDP per capita is a better indicator of standards of living.
Deﬁ  nition
Standard of living refers 
to the social and economic wellbeing of individuals in a country at a particular point in time.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand indicators of living standards
★ understand the components of real GDP and the HDI
★ understand the advantages and disadvantages of real GDP and HDI as 
measures of living standards
★ compare living standards and income distribution
★ discuss reasons for differences in living standards and income 
distribution within and between countries.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   230 24/01/18   11:18 AMIndicators of living standards
231Table 32.1 GDP per capita: selected countries, 2017
Country GDP ($bn) GDP per capita ($) Population (millions)
China 10,730 14,600 1,373.54
Sweden 511.4 49,700 9.88
Luxembourg 60.98 102,000 0.582
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook
Another consideration is infl  ation — the persistent increase in the general level 
of prices over time (see Chapter 31). Infl  ation erodes the value of GDP because the value of money falls if there is infl  ation. 
For example, if a country’s GDP increases by 5 per cent in a year but infl  ation 
also increases by 5 per cent, then the real value of its GDP has not changed. Hence, for a more accurate measure of GDP as an indicator of living standards, the monetary value of GDP must be adjusted for price changes. This adjusted measure is known as real GDP. Hence, real GDP per capita is an even better indicator of living standards than GDP per capita.
Components of the Human Development Index (HDI)
An alternative measure of living standards that looks at factors beyond real GDP is called the Human Development Index (HDI). This is a composite indicator of living standards in a country, combining three dimensions of human development:
» Healthcare — this indicator measures life expectancy at birth. The better the 
healthcare in a country, the greater its social and economic wellbeing tends to be. 
» Education — this indicator measures the mean years of schooling and the 
expected years of schooling in the country. In general, the higher the average years of schooling, the greater the degree of human development.
» Income levels — the higher the national income (or GDP) of a country, the 
greater human development tends to be. Hence, poor countries such as Mozambique, Afghanistan, Sudan and Rwanda tend to have a low HDI. Wealthy countries such as Norway, New Zealand and Canada have a high HDI.
The main advantage of using the HDI rather than real GDP is that the former is a composite index — it considers several key indicators of standards of living, rather than a single one. In addition, improvements in education and healthcare are more likely than real GDP to indicate a country’s level of social wellbeing, especially if income is not distributed very evenly in the economy.
However, there are limitations in using the HDI to measure living standards. 
These include:
» Qualitative factors — the HDI ignores qualitative factors affecting living 
standards, such as gender inequalities and human rights.
» Income distribution — the HDI does not take account of the inequitable 
distribution of income in the economy, and lacks accuracy as an indicator of living standards for the ‘average’ person.
» Environmental issues — the HDI ignores environmental and resource 
depletion resulting from economic growth.
» Cultural differences — although the HDI is a composite indicator, it ignores 
cultural variations and different interpretations of the meaning of standards of living.Study tip
Real GDP ﬁ  gures do not 
take into consideration variations in the cost of living in different parts of the world. For example, while real GDP per capita might be relatively high in Singapore (around $53,000) and Hong Kong (about $42,500), these are the two most expensive places to live in the world (see Table 31.6).
Deﬁ  nition
The Human Development Index is the United Nations’ composite indicator of living standards in a country, comprising three dimensions of human development: education, healthcare and income.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   231 24/01/18   11:18 AM32	 livinG	stanDarDs
232
Activity
Study the information below about the HDI of four countries. Identify which of the 
countries A, B, C and D are Australia, Ethiopia, Russia and Vietnam. Explain the reasoning behind your answers.
Country HDI Country HDI
A 0.929 C 0.593
B 0.755 D 0.363 
Activity
Study the information below about the HDI of four countries. Identify which of the 
countries A, B, C and D are Australia, Ethiopia, Russia and Vietnam. Explain the 
Activities
1 Use the internet to research the top ten countries as measured by the HDI. 2 Discuss whether the HDI is a good measure of living standards in these countries.
Activities
1
 Use the internet to research the top ten countries as measured by the HDI. 
2
 Discuss whether the HDI is a good measure of living standards in these countries.
Comparing living standards and income 
distribution
There are many factors that cause differences in living standards and income 
distribution within and between countries. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
» Productivity levels — differences in productivity levels cause differences in wages and earnings. Highly skilled and experienced workers (see Chapter 18) earn higher salaries, so will tend to enjoy a higher standard of living.
» Role of governments — governments can use direct taxes (imposed on income, wealth or profi  ts) to redistribute income in the economy. A mixed economy is more likely to do this than a market economy (see Chapter 13). A fairer distribution of income and wealth can help to raise living standards for the majority of a population.
» Size of population — the size and demographics of a population (see Chapter 34) have a direct impact on living standards. Densely populated cities tend to have higher rents due to limited space and high demand, as well as congestion, pollution and higher living costs (see Table 32.2).
Table 32.2 The world’s most expensive cities to live in
1 Hong Kong SAR, China
2 Sydney, Australia
3 Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
4 Auckland, New Zealand
5 San Jose, USA
6 Melbourne, Australia
7 Honolulu, Hawaii
8 Los Angeles, USA
9 San Francisco, USA
10 Bournemouth and Dorset, UK
Source: World Economic Forum
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   232 24/01/18   11:18 AMComparing living standards and income distribution
233» Distribution of national income — although national income may be high, 
it may not be distributed in a socially desirable way. For example, there are huge wealth gaps in most societies (hence the need to redistribute national income). In addition, the composition of GDP is important to consider. For example, if it increases because of higher government spending on the military, this does not translate to better living standards for the majority of the population.
» Regional differences — there are regional income and wealth disparities within countries. For example, data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show the average income level in London is higher than in other parts of the UK. In 2016 the median average weekly income was £659.90 for Londoners but only £473.40 for those in Wales. Even within London there were differences, with those in the City of London earning an average of £48,203 per year, and those in Camden, London, earning £34,987. 
» General price level — inflation (see Chapter 31) increases the cost of living, so an increase in the general price level tends to have a negative impact on standards of living. For example, economic instability in Venezuela caused the inflation rate to soar above 740 per cent in 2017. This means that something priced at 100 Venezuelan bolivar fuerte (VEF) at the beginning of the year would have increased in price to VEF840 by the end of the year.
» Level of education — there is a positive correlation between educational attainment and earnings (see Table 18.3 and Table 32.3). In general, the more educated and well qualified a person is, the higher their earning potential tends to be. This has a direct impact on their living standards.
» Level of freedom — various measures of living standards include consideration of civil liberties, political rights, religious freedom and economic rights. The Human Freedom Index measures 79 indicators of personal, civil and economic freedom. It is the most comprehensive index on freedom for countries around the world (see Table 32.4).
Table 32.4 Human Freedom Index, 2017
Rank Country Rank Country
1 Hong Kong, SAR 152 Iran
2 Switzerland 150 Congo, Democratic Republic
3 Finland 150 Myanmar
4 Denmark 149 Zimbabwe
5 New Zealand 148 Yemen
6 Canada 147 Central African Republic
7 Australia 146 Algeria
8 Ireland 145 Ethiopia
9 United Kingdom 144 Venezuela
10 Sweden 143 Chad
Source: Fraser InstituteTable 32.3 The world’s ten 
best school systems
1 Finland
2 Switzerland3 Belgium4 Singapore5 Netherlands6 Qatar6 Ireland8 Estonia9 New Zealand9 Barbados
Source: World 
Economic
 Forum
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   233 24/01/18   11:18 AM32	 livinG	stanDarDs
234
Exam-style questions
1 Which option is not a measure of a country’s standard of living? [1]
A Education indicators
B Healthcare indicatorsC Population sizeD Real GDP per capita
2 Which statement best explains why a country’s real GDP per capita is likely to 
affect its citizens’ standard of living? [1]
A Higher real GDP per capita means the average citizen can buy more goods 
and services.
B Infl  ation must be accounted for when considering living standards.C Real GDP per capita always falls when the population size increases.D Real GDP per capita is the only measure of living standards in a country.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by living standards?
2 How does real GDP per head differ from GDP per head?3 What is the HDI?4 What are the limitations of using the HDI as a measure of living standards?5 What are the main reasons for differences in living standards and income distribution 
within and between countries? 
Revision checklist
✔ Standard of living refers to the social and economic wellbeing of 
individuals in a country at a particular point in time.
✔ The two main indicators of living standards are GDP per head and the 
Human Development Index.
✔ GDP per capita is a measure of living standards that involves dividing a 
country’s GDP by the size of the country’s population.
✔ The Human Development Index is the United Nations’ composite 
indicator of living standards in a country. It measures three dimensions 
of human development: healthcare, education and income levels.
✔ Factors that cause differences in living standards and income distribution 
within and between countries include: different productivity levels, population size, the role of governments, the distribution of national income, regional differences in incomes, the general price level, the overall level of educational attainment and the level of freedom.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   234 24/01/18   11:18 AM235
 33  Poverty
Poverty
Poverty is a condition that exists when people lack adequate income and wealth 
to sustain a basic standard of living. The eradication of poverty is a fundamental macroeconomic objective for many governments around the world. This is because poverty creates many social and economic problems, including poor health (such as malnutrition and famine), deaths, crime, high unemployment, the need for welfare provision and lower national output.
The United Nations defi  nes poverty as ‘a lack of income and productive resources 
to ensure sustainable livelihoods’. This includes:
» hunger and malnutrition
» ill health and mortality from illness
» limited or lack of access to education and other basic services
» homelessness and inadequate housing
» unsafe environments
» social discrimination and exclusion.
Table 33.1 shows the countries with the highest and the lowest GDP per capita. According to the CIA World Factbook, Liechtenstein (located between Austria and Switzerland) had the highest GDP per capita (around $381 per day) while Somalia (located next to Ethiopia and Kenya) had the lowest (at just $1.09 per day).
Table 33.1 The world’s richest and poorest countries, 2016
Richest countries Poorest countries
Rank Country GDP per capita ($) Rank Country GDP per capita ($)
1 Liechtenstein 139,100 1 Somalia 400
2 Qatar 129,700 2 Central African 
Republic700
3 Monaco 115,700 3 Burundi 800
4 Luxembourg 102,000 4 Congo, 
Democratic 
Republic of the800
5 Falkland 
Islands96,200 5 Liberia 900
6 Macau 96,100 6 Tokelau 1,000
7 Singapore 87,100 7 Malawi 1,100
8 Bermuda 85,700 8 Niger 1,100
9 Isle of Man 84,600 9 Mozambique 1,200
10 Brunei 79,700 10 Eritrea 1,300
Source: CIA, World Factbook 
Deﬁ  nition
Poverty  is a condition 
that exists when people lack adequate income and wealth to sustain a basic standard of living.
Study tip
Poverty exists in all 
countries, although it is more visible in poorer countries which have mass poverty. Even in wealthy nations, economic recession or natural disasters can cause widespread poverty. It is therefore incorrect to assume that only low-income countries suffer from poverty.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne absolute and relative poverty
★ explain the causes of poverty
★ discuss policies to alleviate poverty and redistribute income.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   235 24/01/18   11:18 AM33	 Poverty
236Exam-style questions
According to the US Census Bureau, 15 per cent of individuals in the United 
States live below the poverty line (the minimum level of income judged to be adequate in a particular country). The aftershock of the global fi  nancial crisis meant rising unemployment and related problems for the economy. This resulted in over 46 million people living in poverty in the USA — more than at any point in the nation’s history.
a Defi  ne the term poverty. [2]
b Explain why poverty is a concern for the US government. [4]
c Discuss whether the standard of living is always higher in developed 
than in developing countries. [8]
There are two categories of poverty: absolute poverty and relative poverty.
Absolute poverty
Absolute poverty exists when there is extreme outright poverty. People in absolute poverty are undeniably poor. Their income, if any, is entirely spent on minimal amounts of food, clothing and shelter — that is, the basic human needs essential for survival. For many, absolute poverty can mean hunger, malnutrition and homelessness.
There is more than one way to measure absolute poverty. The most common 
method is to calculate the number of individuals living below a certain level of income (called the income threshold or the poverty line). The most common income threshold, set by the World Bank, is $1.25 a day. Many people around the world still live below this amount, so such extreme poverty means they are unable to buy enough food to survive.
Since 1995, the United Nations has adopted the following defi  nition of 
absolute poverty:
A condition characterised by severe deprivation of basic human needs, including 
food, safe drinking water, sanitation facilities, health, shelter, education and information. It depends not only on income but also on access to services.
Case study: Burundi
Burundi is one of the poorest countries on the planet, with around 65 per cent of its 
population of 11.1 million people living below the poverty line. GDP per capita in the East African country is a meagre $800 (or $2.19 per day) and 45.8 per cent of the country’s GDP comes from agriculture. Burundi has a staggering infant mortality rate of 60.4 deaths per 1000 live births — one of the highest rates in the world. The median age is just 17 years and life expectancy is 60.5 years.
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook
Relative poverty
Relative poverty is a comparative measure of poverty, rather than an absolute 
measure. People in absolute poverty are undeniably impoverished, whereas those in relative poverty have a lower standard of living in comparison to the average member of society. For example, it is rather pointless to compare what is meant by poverty for the average person living in Singapore or Luxembourg with the situation of someone living in poverty in Sierra Leone or Niger. Relative poverty 
Deﬁ  nition
Absolute poverty exists 
when there is extreme outright poverty, i.e. income equal to or less than $1.25 per day.
Deﬁ  nition
Relative poverty is a comparative measure of poverty, referring to those who have a lower standard of living in comparison to the average member of society.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   236 24/01/18   11:18 AMCauses of poverty 
237measures the extent to which a person’s fi  nancial resources fall below the average 
income for the country’s population. Although real GDP (see Chapter 29) and standards of living (see Chapter 32) have grown over time, these gains are not evenly distributed across the population.
Case study: The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
On 25 September 2015, the United Nations devised the anti-poverty Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). These 
consist of 17 international development goals to be achieved by 2030 to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure prosperity for all (see Figure 33.1).
▲ Figure 33.1 The Sustainable Development Goals
Source: United Nations
Causes of poverty 
Poor countries, with a high degree of poverty, have common characteristics. The 
causes (and consequences) of poverty include the following interrelated factors:
» Unemployment — people in poverty are likely to be unemployed, perhaps due to the combination of low literacy, lack of skills and poor health. Hence, labour productivity in less economically developed countries (LEDCs) also tends to be low, which again makes it diffi  cult for people to break out of poverty. Labour productivity is a measure of the effi  ciency of labour in the production process, such as output per worker (see Chapter 21).
» Low wages — GDP per capita is calculated by dividing the gross domestic product of a country by its population to fi  nd the income level of the average Study tip
It is possible for people to 
be relatively well off but still to live in absolute poverty. This is because these people can earn more than the average person, yet still face ﬁ  nancial difﬁ  culties in meeting their basic human needs.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   237 24/01/18   11:18 AM33	 Poverty
238person. The lower the GDP per person, the poorer the country tends to be due 
to the low wages in the economy. This tends to be the case in countries with a high proportion of unskilled workers. This limits consumption and investment in the economy, and so can cause poverty. According to the World Bank, in 2017 Luxembourg had the highest GDP per head at $99,718 (about $273 per day), whereas Burundi had the lowest at just $277 (just $0.76 per day).
» Illness — illnesses caused by malnutrition and a lack of healthcare reduce life expectancy in a country. Life expectancy measures the number of years that the average person in a country is anticipated to live for, based on statistical trends. The lower the life expectancy, the poorer the country tends to be and so the greater the degree of poverty in the country. Data from the World Bank support this, with the likes of Swaziland, Sierra Leone, Central African Republic, Chad and Côte d’Ivoire all having life expectancy of between 49 and 52 years in 2017. By contrast, wealthy states such as Hong Kong, Japan, Italy, Iceland and Switzerland all have good healthcare provision, so life expectancy is between 83 and 84 years in these countries.
» Age — age is key factor causing poverty. For example, the root cause of child 
labour in many parts of the world is extreme poverty, which forces parents to allow their children to work. Poverty also exists among the elderly — a growing proportion of people are living longer, yet many elderly people have no income to sustain their standard of living.
» Poor healthcare — insufficient investment in health services hinders the ability of a country to develop and get out of poverty. Healthcare expenditure per capita is low in LEDCs. Their governments are unable to provide preventive and curative healthcare services for the mass population. According to the World Bank, in 2017 the USA spent 17.1% of its GDP on healthcare services, whereas this figure was only 3.6% in Chad, 3.6% in Ghana, 2.6% in Pakistan and just 1.5% in Timor-Leste.
» Low literacy rates — literacy rates measure the proportion of the population aged 15 and above who can read and write. Low-income countries have insufficient investment in education and training, so their literacy rates tend to be low. This has major consequences for employment, production and productivity, thus negatively impacting on GDP and making it extremely difficult to eradicate poverty. The vast majority of high-income countries will have 100% adult literacy rates whereas in 2017 low-income countries had very low literacy rates — for example, Mali (33%), South Sudan (32%), Guinea (30%) and Niger (19%).
» High population growth — population growth measures the annual percentage change in the population of a country. Poorer countries tend to have high population growth rates for several reasons: a lack of family planning and sex education, poor access to contraception and cultural norms (it is common and widely accepted to have a large number of children in some countries and cultures). Sharing a limited amount of resources among a growing population hinders the country’s ability to lift itself out of poverty.
» Poor infrastructure — infrastructure refers to the transportation and communications networks necessary for the efficient functioning of an economy, such as buildings, railways, roads, airports, water systems, ICT systems including the internet and power supplies. According to the World Economic Forum, countries with very poor infrastructure include: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Angola, Mongolia, Nepal, Lebanon and Chad. Table 33.2 shows the number of internet users per 100 people in the most and the least connected countries in 2016.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   238 24/01/18   11:18 AMCauses of poverty 
239Table 33.2 Internet users around the world
Most connected countries Least connected countries
Country Internet users  
(per 100 people)Country Internet users  (per 100 people)
Iceland 100.0 Eritrea 1.1
Faroe Islands 98.5 Timor-Leste 1.2
Norway 98.0 Burundi 1.5
Bermuda 97.4 Somalia 1.7
Andorra 96.5 Guinea 1.8
Source: adapted from Internet Live Stats
» Low foreign direct investment (FDI) — the lack of capital resources also 
limits the ability of a country to create income and wealth. FDI refers to cross-border investment made by multinational companies and other investors. Poor countries, with their lack of economic growth and poor infrastructure, do not tend to attract FDI due to the expected high risks and low financial returns. This keeps these countries stuck in poverty.
» High public debt — public debt refers to the money owed by the government (public sector). In general, low-income countries are far more likely to borrow money to finance their public sector expenditure, and the higher the public debt, the lower a country’s standard of living tends to be. This is because the government will need to repay its loans, along with interest payments, rather than using the funds for investment in the economy. However, the huge impact of the 2008 global financial crisis harmed developed as well as less developed countries (see Table 33.3). In fact, Japan tops the chart of government debts, partly because of the devastating earthquake and tsunami of March 2011, the worst natural disaster in the country’s history. However, it is common for LEDCs to pay more for financing their public debts, partly due to the high interest rates imposed and partly due to a fall in the value of their currency. This makes repayment of public debt increasingly unsustainable for LEDCs, leading to further borrowing, ever-increasing debts and widespread poverty.
Table 33.3 Government debts around the world, 2016
Most indebted countries Least indebted countries
Country Public debt as % of GDP Country Public debt as % of GDP
Japan 234.7 Wallis and Futuna 5.6
Greece 181.6 New Caledonia 6.5
Lebanon 161.5 Tajikistan 6.5
Italy 132.5 Gibraltar 7.5
Jamaica 130.1 Kiribati 8.6
Cabo Verde 128.6 Estonia 9.7
Portugal 126.2 Libya 10.0
Eritrea 119.8 Kosovo 10.6
Singapore 110.5 Uzbekistan 11.0
Grenada 110.0 Liberia 11.8
Source: CIA, World Factbook 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   239 24/01/18   11:18 AM33	 Poverty
240» Reliance on primary sector output — low-income countries tend to 
over-rely on the production and export of primary sector output, such as agricultural products. These tend to have low prices and profit margins in comparison to manufactured products and tertiary sector services. Table 33.4 compares the output from the three sectors of the economy for selected countries.
Table 33.4 Output of the economy by sector: selected countries, 2016
Country Sector of the economy (%) GDP per capita ($)
Primary Secondary Tertiary
Sierra Leone 71.1 7.9 21.0 1,700
Central African Republic 58.0 11.7 30.3 700
Chad 53.0 12.8 34.2 2,600
Guinea-Bissau 45.0 13.3 41.7 1,600
Ethiopia 36.2 17.0 46.8 1,900
Denmark 1.1 23.4 75.5 46,600
United Kingdom 0.6 19.2 80.2 42,500
Germany 0.6 30.3 69.1 48,200
Luxembourg 0.2 11.1 88.7 102,000
Hong Kong 0.1 7.2 92.8 58,100
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook 
» Corruption and instability — a final cause of poverty is the high degree of corruption and instability (economic, social and political) in a country. There are huge opportunity costs of civil war, dishonest government officials, fraudulent behaviour and the purchase of arms and weapons. Corruption and instability therefore hinder economic development, result in greater inequalities in income distribution, and create poverty.
Policies to alleviate poverty and 
redistribute income
Policies to help alleviate poverty and to redistribute income include the following:
» Promoting economic growth — any expansionary policy, such as lower taxes 
(see Chapter 26) or lower interest rates (see Chapter 27), can encourage consumer spending and investment expenditure in the economy. In the long run, this can help to create more jobs and alleviate the problems of poverty. Similarly, lower exchange rates (see Chapter 38) can encourage export sales as the price for foreign buyers is lower. As higher export earnings help to boost GDP, this can also help to create more jobs and wealth in the economy over time. Sustained economic growth helps to create more income and wealth for the country (see Chapter 29). This can then be redistributed to the deprived and underprivileged members of society.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   240 24/01/18   11:18 AMPolicies to alleviate poverty and redistribute income
241» Improving education — government provision of education can help to 
alleviate poverty. By improving access to education for everyone, it narrows the gap between the rich and the poor. In most cases, a person’s level of education tends to affect their earnings and earning potential (see Table 18.3). Over time, policies to increase the quantity and quality of education in the economy will help to improve the human capital and productive capacity of the country, thereby creating economic growth and lowering poverty. Similarly, the provision of and increased access to other essential services, such as healthcare and housing, will also help.
» Providing more generous state beneﬁ  ts — government provision of welfare benefi  ts gives fi  nancial assistance to enable the unemployed and disadvantaged to meet their basic needs. Examples of such payments include: unemployment benefi  t, state pension funds for the elderly, and child benefi  t (to reduce child poverty). State benefi  ts help to redistribute income and alleviate poverty by ensuring every citizen has access to basic necessities. Macroeconomic policies aimed at reducing unemployment (see Chapter 30) also help, because unemployment is a major cause of poverty and inequality. Examples are government incentives to attract foreign direct investment and government-funded job creation and retraining schemes.
» Using progressive taxation — progressive tax systems (see Chapter 26) reduce the gap between the rich and poor members of a country. Higher-income groups pay a higher percentage of their incomes in tax, with the tax proceeds being used by the government to support lower-income groups or those without any income. This is a common method used to alleviate poverty and redistribute income and wealth in society.
» Introducing (or increasing) a national minimum wage — the introduction of a national minimum wage, or imposing a higher minimum wage rate (see Chapter 18), can improve the standard of living for low-income households. Hence, such policies help to alleviate poverty in the economy.
Activity
a Produce a short piece of writing of 500–750 words entitled ‘A day in the life’ of a 
teenager living in a LEDC of your choice.
b You need to gather the necessary data and information before you begin your writing.
c Your work must reﬂ  ect the macroeconomic indicators, without actually mentioning 
the indicators by name.
d This can be in the format of an essay, diary entry, magazine article or letter.
Be prepared to share your ﬁ  ndings with your teacher and classmates.
Activity
a
 Produce a short piece of writing of 500–750 words entitled ‘A day in the life’ of a 
teenager living in a LEDC of your choice.
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by poverty and what are the signs that there is poverty in the 
economy?
2 How does absolute poverty differ from relative poverty?
3 What are the main causes of poverty?4 Why does an overreliance on primary sector output hinder the growth of low-income 
countries?
5 What are the main policies that can be used to alleviate poverty and redistribute 
income in the economy?
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   241 24/01/18   11:18 AM33	 Poverty
242
Revision checklist
✔ Poverty is a condition that exists when people lack adequate income and 
wealth to sustain a basic standard of living.
✔ Poverty creates problems for society and the economy because it causes 
poor health (such as malnutrition and famine), deaths, crime, high 
unemployment, the need for welfare provision and lower national output.
✔ Absolute poverty exists when there is extreme outright poverty — that is, 
income equal to or less than $1.25 per day. Such extreme poverty means people are unable to buy enough food to survive.
✔ Relative poverty is a comparative measure of poverty, referring to those 
who have a lower standard of living than the average member of society.
✔ Causes (and consequences) of poverty include: low GDP per capita, 
low life expectancy, low literacy rates, high population growth, poor infrastructure, low foreign direct investment, poor healthcare, low productivity, high public debt, overreliance on primary sector output, and corruption and instability in the economy.
✔ Policies to alleviate poverty and redistribute income include: policies 
to promote economic growth, improving education, using progressive taxation and introducing (or increasing) a national minimum wage.
 Poverty is a condition that exists when people lack adequate income and 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   242 24/01/18   11:18 AM243
 34  Population
Factors that affect population growth
Population refers to the total number of inhabitants of a particular country. 
Economists are interested in population size as people are essential for the economic prosperity of a country and also responsible for the depletion of the earth’s scarce resources. Population growth refers to the rate of change in the size of a country’s population. Change in population size can have huge and long-lasting effects on the world’s economy and the natural environment.
▲ The higher a country’s birth rate, the greater its population growth tends to be
Changes in three key factors affect the rate of population growth.
Birth rate 
The birth rate measures the number of live births per thousand of the population in a year. It is measured by dividing the total number of births in a country by the population size, expressed per thousand of the population. For example, 
Deﬁ  nition
The birth rate measures 
the number of live births per thousand of the population in a year.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ describe the factors that affect population growth
★ explain reasons for the different rates of population growth in different 
countries
★ describe the effects of changes in the size and structure of population on 
different countries.
Deﬁ  nitions
Population refers to the total number of inhabitants of a particular country.Population growth refers to the rate of change in the size of a country’s population.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   243 24/01/18   11:18 AM34 POPULATION
244in 2016 Swaziland’s birth rate was approximately 29.4 per thousand of the 
population. The higher a country’s birth rate, the greater its population growth will tend to be. According to the CIA World Factbook, in 2017 Niger, Mali and Uganda had the highest birth rates (of 44.8, 44.4 and 43.4 respectively) whereas Monaco, Saint Pierre and Miquelona, and Japan had the lowest birth rates (of/uni00A06.6,/uni00A07.2 and 7.8 respectively). 
A similar measure is the fertility rate, which measures the average number of 
children born per woman. This indicates the potential for population change in a country. Economists consider a fertility rate of two children per woman to be the minimum replacement fertility rate for a stable population (that is, the number of children that the average woman must have to replace the existing population). According to the CIA World Factbook, in 2017 Mali, Burundi and Zambia had the highest fertility rates (of 6.35, 6.08 and 5.85 respectively) whereas Singapore, Macau and Hong Kong had the lowest fertility rates (of 0.78, 0.92 and 1.09 respectively).
Death rate 
This measures the number of deaths per thousand of the population in a year. It is measured by dividing the total number of deaths in a country by the population size, expressed per thousand of the population. For example, in 2016 Canada had a death rate of approximately 8.5 per thousand of the population. The lower a country’s death rate, the greater its population growth will tend to be. According to the CIA World Factbook, in 2017 Lesotho, Bulgaria and Lithuania had the highest death rates (of 14.9, 14.5 and 14.5 respectively) whereas Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait had the lowest death rates (of 1.5, 2.0 and 2.2 respectively). The death rate is dependent on factors that affect the quality of life, such as income levels, health technologies, nutrition and housing.
Net migration rate 
The size of a population can also change due to the physical movement of people in and out of a country. Immigration occurs when people enter a country to live and work. Emigration occurs when people leave a country to live and work abroad. The net migration rate measures the difference between the number of people entering and leaving a country per thousand of the population in a year. It is calculated using the formula:
Net migration rate = immigration − emigration
If more people enter a country than leave in the year, there is said to be net immigration. By contrast, if more people leave a country than enter the country, there is said to be net emigration. In 2016 Qatar, the British Virgin Islands and Luxembourg had the highest net migration rates (of 18.2, 16.9 and 16.3 respectively). Micronesia, American Samoa and Tonga had the lowest net migration rates (i.e. net emigration rates) of −20.9, −20.6 and −17.8 respectively.
Reasons for different rates of population 
growth in different countries
The world’s population has continually grown (see Figure 34.1). However, 
there/uni00A0are differences in population growth rates in different countries (see Table/uni00A034.1).
Deﬁ  nitions
The fertility rate measures 
the average number of births per woman. It is used as a component to measure population growth.The replacement fertility rate  is the number 
of children that the average woman must have to maintain a stable population size.
Deﬁ  nition
The net migration rate measures the difference between immigration and emigration rates for a country, thus indicating the physical movement of people into and out of a country.
Study tip
The net migration rate 
measures the overall level of population change resulting from all migrants. It does not distinguish between worker migrants, refugees and unlawful (undocumented) migrants.
Deﬁ  nitions
The death rate measures the number of deaths per thousand of the population in a year .
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   244 06/02/18   12:58 PMReasons for different rates of population growth in different countries
2450
1973
YearPopulation (in millions)
1983 1993 2003 2013 2023 2033200040006000800010000
Source: adapted from Ibiblio 
▲ Figure 34.1 The world’s population, 1973–2033 (projected)
Activity
What do you think is the exact size of the world’s population? Take a look here to see 
how accurate or imprecise you were: www.census.gov/population/international/
Activity
What do you think is the exact size of the world’s population? Take a look here to see 
how accurate or imprecise you were: 
Table 34.1 The world’s most and least populous countries, 2016
Most populous countries Least populous countries
Rank Country Population (millions) Rank Country Population
1 China 1373.54 1 Pitcairn Islands 54
2 India 1266.88 2 Cocos (Keeling) 
Islands596
3 USA 323.99 3 Vatican City 1000
4 Indonesia 258.32 4 Niue 1190
5 Brazil 205.82 5 Tokelau 1337
Source: CIA, World Factbook 
▲ Japan has an ageing population in which around 30 per cent of the population are aged over 60
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   245 06/02/18   1:02 PM34	 PoPulation
246There are several reasons for the different rates of population growth in different 
countries. These reasons involve differences in the factors that affect population growth (explained above):
» Birth rate — more economically developed countries (MEDCs) tend to have lower birth rates than less economically developed countries (LEDCs). This is partly due to education and access to contraception, the high costs of raising children, and women choosing to pursue careers and therefore opting to have fewer children and at a later stage in their lives.
» Death rate — due to better-quality education, healthcare, nutrition and sanitation, people in MEDCs tend to live longer. Famine, poverty, poor housing, high infant mortality rates and diseases tend to reduce life expectancy in LEDCs.
» Net migration rate — people migrate for different reasons, such as in search of better job opportunities, to take advantage of lower taxes, or to avoid civil unrest in the home country. For example, hundreds of thousands of Filipinos and Indonesians work as domestic helpers in Hong Kong, Singapore and Malaysia due to the higher salaries. The net effect of immigration and emigration will clearly have a direct impact on rates of population growth in different countries.
Activity
Investigate the costs of raising a child up to the age of 18 in your country or a country 
of your choice. Try to be as accurate as possible by including and itemising the costs of food, clothing, education, healthcare, recreation, entertainment, holidays and so on. Compare your results with others in the class. Why might such ﬁ  ndings be of interest to economists?
Activity
Investigate the costs of raising a child up to the age of 18 in your country or a country 
of your choice. Try to be as accurate as possible by including and itemising the costs 
Effects of changes in the size and structure 
of population on different countries
The optimum population
While there are reasons for different population sizes and rates of population 
growth in different countries, economists argue that there is an optimal (best or ideal) population for each country. An optimum population exists when the 
output of goods and services per capita (as measured by GDP per head) of the population is maximised (see Figure 34.2).
A country is under-populated if it does 
not have suffi  cient labour to make the best use of its resources. In this case, GDP per head of the population could be increased if there were more human resources. Fertility rates below the replacement level can lead to under-population, causing potential economic decline. In this case, to reach the optimum population, the 
Population sizeOptimumGDP per head ($)
O Under-population Over-population
▲ Figure 34.2 The optimum population
Deﬁ  nition
Optimum population 
exists when the output of goods and services per head of the population is maximised.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   246 24/01/18   11:18 AMEffects of changes in the size and structure of population on different countries
247government could introduce measures to increase the population size, such as 
encouraging immigration.
A country that is over-populated is too large, given the available resources 
of the country. Fertility rates above the replacement level can lead to potential over-population, with negative economic consequences such as famine, housing shortages, energy shortages and diseases. This causes a fall in GDP per capita as there are insufficient resources to sustain the population. In this case, to reach the optimum population, the government could introduce measures either to reduce the population size or to boost investment and productivity in the economy.
▲ Over-population in Brazilian cities has resulted in vast slums due to housing shortages
Countries with the highest and lowest population growth rates are shown in Table 34.2.
Table 34.2 Countries with the highest and lowest population growth rates, 2017 
Highest population growth Lowest population growth
Rank Country Growth (%) Rank Country Growth (%)
1 South Sudan 3.92 1 Cook Islands −0.288
2 Malawi 3.32 2 Saint Pierre and 
Miquelon−1.09
3 Burundi 3.26 3 Latvia −1.07
4 Niger 3.22 4 Lithuania −1.06
5 Uganda 3.22 5 Moldova −1.04
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   247 24/01/18   11:18 AM34	 PoPulation
248Population distribution
Population distribution refers to the composition and structure of a country’s 
population. The study of population distribution and trends in the composition of a population is called demographics. Such demographics include differences in the gender and age distribution.
Gender distribution 
This refers to the number of males compared to the number of females in the population. For the vast majority of countries, the gender split is quite even. Data from the CIA World Factbook for Denmark, for example, show the following gender ratios in 2017:
» At birth: 1.06 male(s) per female.
» Under 15 years: 1.05 male(s) per female. 
» 15–64 years: 1.01 male(s) per female. 
» 65 years and over: 0.8 male(s) per female. 
» Total population: 0.97 male(s) per female.
Age distribution 
This refers to the number of people in different age groups in the population. Low-income countries tend to have a relatively larger proportion of their population in the younger age groups. For example, around 39 per cent of the population in Ghana are aged 14 and below, with only about 4 per cent of the population aged 65 and over. By contrast, wealthier countries tend to have an ageing population with a growing number of people in older age groups. For example, under 13 per cent of people in Japan are aged 14 and below, while over 27 per cent are aged 65 and above.
Population pyramids are a graphical representation of the age and gender 
distribution of a country’s population (see Figures 34.3 and 34.4).
21.6 1.2 0.8 0.4Ghana – 2016 Female Male
Age group Population (in millions) Population (in millions)0 00.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 20–4100+
95–99
90–94
85–89
80–8475–79
70–7465–69
60–64
55–59
50–54
45–49
40–44
35–39
30–34
25–29
20–24
15–19
10–14
5–9
Source: CIA, World Factbook 
▲ Figure 34.3 Ghana’s age distribution (population pyramid), 2016
Deﬁ  nitions
Population distribution 
refers to the composition and structure of a country’s population.Demographics is the study of population distribution and trends.
Deﬁ  nition
Population pyramids are a graphical representation of the age and gender distribution of a country’s population.
Study tip
Students are expected to be 
able to interpret population pyramids. They are not, however, expected to draw population pyramids.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   248 24/01/18   11:18 AMEffects of changes in the size and structure of population on different countries
24964.8 3.6 2.4 1.2Japan – 2016 Female Male
Age group Population (in millions) Population (in millions)0 01.2 2.4 3.6 4.8 60–4100+
95–99
90–94
85–89
80–8475–79
70–7465–69
60–64
55–59
50–54
45–49
40–44
35–39
30–34
25–29
20–24
15–19
10–14
5–9
Source: CIA, World Factbook 
▲ Figure 34.4 Japan’s age distribution (population pyramid), 2016 
Dependency ratio 
The dependency ratio is a comparison of the number of people who are not in 
the labour force with the number of people in active paid employment. For most economists, the dependent population typically includes all those aged between 0 and 14 (those below the school leaving age) and those aged 65 and above (those above the retirement age). However, it also includes full-time students and the unemployed. The dependency ratio measures the dependent population as a proportion of the total active labour force (the working population comprised those aged between 15 and 65). It is therefore calculated using the formula:
Dependency ratio = dependent population ÷ working population
The higher the dependency ratio, the greater the tax burden on the working population to support those who are not economically active (not in paid employment). The dependency ratio can increase because of:
» higher birth rates, which mainly occur in less economically developed countries
» a higher compulsory school leaving age, raising the number of people classifi  ed 
as part of the dependent population
» social changes such as workers entering the labour force at a later stage due to 
greater demand for higher education, or more people choosing early retirement (thus reducing the size of the working population).
Activity
Investigate China’s one-child policy (from 1979 to 2015) and answer the following 
questions:
a Why was the one-child policy introduced?
b What were the exemptions to the policy?c What are the positive and negative consequences of the policy for future 
generations?
A good starting point is to watch this video clip on YouTube: http://goo.gl/7EnIV
Activity
Investigate China’s one-child policy (from 1979 to 2015) and answer the following 
questions:
Study tip
Population pyramids 
can provide insights into the social, political and economic stability of a country. The population distribution is shown along the x-axis, with males shown on the left and females on the right. The population is broken down into 5-year age groups, with the youngest age group at the bottom.
Deﬁ  nitions
The dependency ratio is a comparison of the number of people who are not in the labour force with the number of people in active paid employment.The working population refers to the active labour force aged 15–65, i.e. those who are willing and able to work. This consists of those in paid employment, the self-employed and the unemployed.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   249 24/01/18   11:18 AM34	 Po Pulation
250
▲ China’s army of ‘little emperors’ is seen as a consequence of the one-child policy
Exam-style questions
Study the data below from the CIA World Factbook, showing the gender ratios in 
China in 2017, and answer the questions that follow.
• At birth: 1.13 male(s) per female.
• Under 15 years: 1.17 male(s) per female.
• 15–64 years: 1.06 male(s) per female. 
• 65 years and over: 0.92 male(s) per female. 
• Total population: 1.06 male(s) per female.
a Describe how China’s one-child policy might have influenced the  
gender ratios in China.  [2]
b Explain two economic implications for a country that has an uneven  gender ratio.
 [4]
Effects of population changes
Population growth
The world’s population reached 1 billion people around 1804. This had doubled to 2 billion by 1927 and reached 5 billion in 1987. According to the United Nations, the world’s population exceeded 7 billion people in October 2011 and will reach 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   250 24/01/18   11:18 AMEffects of changes in the size and structure of population on different countries
2519 billion by 2050. This phenomenal and unprecedented population growth offers 
both opportunities and challenges for economists.
The economic consequences of population growth were first presented by 
the Reverend Thomas R. Malthus (1766–1834). He suggested that uncontrolled population growth would put pressure on the resources of the country, thus negatively impacting living standards. This is because, according to Malthus, population growth occurs at a geometric rate — that is, it grows at a common ratio of 2 (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 and so forth) whereas food production only grows at an arithmetic rate (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). If the theory materialised, this means that population growth would eventually exceed food output for the population. This has not happened in reality for two main reasons:
» slower population growth rates than expected, especially in more economically developed countries, due to social changes such as the high opportunity costs of raising children
» a geometric progression in food production due to advances in food technologies, such as improved farm machinery, irrigation systems, genetics, pesticides and fertilisers.
Economists have found that the core concern about the continuing depletion 
of the planet’s finite resources and rising populations can be met by improved efficiency in the production of food and the development of alternative renewable energy sources.
Population distribution
The changing size and structure of the population (such as age and gender) can also have effects on an economy. These consequences include impacts on the following:
» Consumers — the demand for goods and services changes with variations in population trends. For example, customers have different demands based on their age and gender. Elderly people in a country that has an ageing population might spend proportionately more of their money on healthcare and related products. By contrast, parents with young children might spend more of their income on housing, education, clothing, family vacations and toys. Firms will seek to exploit these changes in demand for different goods and services.
» Firms — the demand for and supply of labour will change following long-term changes in population trends. For example, rapid population growth should increase the future supply of labour. By contrast, the combination of low birth rates and net emigration will reduce the future supply of workers in a country. According to the World Health Organization, a staggering 2 billion people will be aged 60 years and over by 2050 — more than triple the number in 2000. By the end of 2012, only Japan had more than 30 per cent of its population aged at least 60, but some 64 countries are expected to have reached this figure by 2050. The ageing population of these nations, especially in high-income countries, will have profound impacts on the future supply of labour.
» Government — a growing population can bring benefits if it means the government is able to collect more tax revenues from a larger workforce. However, it can also mean added pressure for the government to provide more public services, welfare benefits and state pensions. As a result, many governments have introduced compulsory pension savings schemes and have raised the official retirement age in their country. For example, France increased the retirement age from 60 to 62 years in 2011, with plans to increase this gradually to 68 years of age.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   251 24/01/18   11:18 AM34	 PoPulation
252» The economy — continual population growth puts more pressure on an 
economy’s scarce resources. This can lead to infl  ationary pressures or an increase in the demand for imports if the country cannot produce enough to meet the needs and wants of the population. For example, land in prime locations is scarce, so a larger population in these areas is likely to force land prices to soar. Infl  ation can cause problems for the economy (see Chapter 31) and cause economic growth to slow.
» The natural environment — an increase in the size of a population will also put strain on the environment. Non-renewable resources are depleted in the production process and the increased level of production also puts strain on the natural environment. For example, pollution and traffi  c congestion are by-products of over-populated regions of the world.
Activity
Use the internet to investigate the effects of the changing size and structure of the 
population on a country of your choice. Consider the impact of these changes on households, ﬁ  rms and the government in the country.
Activity
Use the internet to investigate the effects of the changing size and structure of the 
population on a country of your choice. Consider the impact of these changes on 
Exam-style questions
1 According to World Bank statistics, the population of Nigeria rose from 
around 45 million back in 1960 to over 182.2 million by 2015, an increase of 
about 305 per cent. Figure 34.5 illustrates the growth in Nigeria’s population between 2007 and 2015.
2008 2006 2010 2012 2014 2016140150160170180190Million
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 34.5 Nigeria’s population, 2007–15
a Explain one possible cause of the increase in the size of Nigeria’s 
population. [2]
b Explain two economic problems which could be associated with the 
increase in the size of Nigeria’s population. [4]
c Discuss two measures the Nigerian government could use to overcome 
the problems of population growth in its country. [8]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   252 24/01/18   11:18 AMEffects of changes in the size and structure of population on different countries
2532 The median age of the UK population back in 1985 was 35.4 years, but it had 
climbed to 40.0 by 2015. It is projected that the median age will reach 42.2 
by the year 2035. The percentage of people aged 65 and above also increased in the same time period, from 15 per cent of the population to 17 per cent (an increase of 1.7 million people). By 2035 the proportion of the UK population aged 65 and over is expected to exceed 23 per cent.
a What is meant by an ‘ageing population’? [2]
b Explain two causes of the increase in the percentage of people 
aged 65 and above in the UK. [4]
c Analyse the effects of an ageing population on government expenditure, 
government revenue and economic growth. [6]
Chapter review questions
1 What are the three key factors that affect the rate of population growth?
2 How is the net migration rate calculated?3 How do social changes impact on the population size and potential population 
growth?
4 How might economists use population pyramids?5 What are the economic consequences of an ageing population?6 What is the dependency ratio and why is it important?7 What is the optimum population and why do governments strive to achieve this?8 What are the economic consequences of rapid population growth for the economy 
and the natural environment?
Revision checklist
✔ Population refers to the total number of inhabitants in a particular 
country. Population growth refers to the rate of change in the size of a 
country’s population.
✔ Changes in three key factors affect the rate of population growth: birth 
rate, death rate and net migration rate.
✔ Optimum population exists when the output of goods and services per 
head of the population is maximised. A country is under-populated if it does not have sufﬁ  cient labour to make the best use of its resources. A country that is over-populated is too large, given the available resources of the country.
✔ Demographics is the study of population distribution and trends.
✔ Population distribution refers to the composition and structure of a 
country’s population. Population pyramids are a graphical representation of the age and gender distribution of a country’s population.
✔ Population changes have effects on consumers, ﬁ  rms, the government, 
the economy as a whole and the natural environment.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   253 24/01/18   11:18 AM254
 35  Differences in economic 
development between countries
Economic development
Economic development is an intangible concept that considers both quantitative 
and qualitative variables. Essentially, economic development refers to an increase in the standard of living within a country. Factors contributing to this include a reduction in poverty and income inequalities, and an increase in self-esteem, gender equality and political freedom.
Factors accounting for differences in 
economic development 
Various factors account for differences in the economic development of countries. 
These factors include differences in: income (GDP), productivity, population growth, the relative size of the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors, saving and investment, education and healthcare.
Differences in income
The higher the national income (real GDP per capita) of a country, the greater economic development tends to be. There is a positive relationship between a country’s economic growth and its economic development — the wealthier a country is, the higher its standard of living tends to be.
Less economically developed countries (LEDCs) have a low national income 
per head of the population, partly due to their relatively low nominal GDP and partly due to their relatively high birth rate. Many LEDCs suffer from high levels of extreme poverty. According to the United Nations, 1.2 billion people currently live in extreme poverty, mostly in LEDCs.
Income is the most used single indicator of standards of living within a country 
(see Table 35.1).
Table 35.1 GDP per capita: selected countries, 2017
Country GDP ($bn) GDP per capita ($) Population (million)
China 1,073.0 7,812 1,373.54
Indonesia 941.0 3,643 258.32
Sweden 511.4 51,758 9.88
Luxembourg 60.98 104,724 0.582
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook
Deﬁ  nition
Economic development is 
an intangible concept that considers both quantitative and qualitative variables in raising the standard of living within a country.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ explain the causes and impacts of differences in economic development 
between countries.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   254 24/01/18   11:18 AMFactors accounting for differences in economic development 
255Exam-style question
With reference to Table 35.1, explain how national income as measured by GDP 
per capita can be used to measure economic development.  [4]
However, higher real GDP per head does not always lead to a higher standard of living for the majority of people, due to inequalities in the distribution of income. The composition of GDP should also be considered. For example, if a country spends significantly more money on national defence, then national income may grow but development does not necessarily occur. Finally, economic growth can bring about negative consequences such as pollution, climate change and environmental damage. So, other factors must also be considered when measuring differences in economic development between countries.
Differences in productivity
Economic development can vary between countries due to differences in productivity levels (see Chapter 21). For example, low-income countries are unable to gain access to the latest technologies and automated production systems. Such technologies help countries to be more efficient and productive, and so are likely to lead to economic development.
Different countries have different quantities and qualities of natural resources. 
Some countries have plentiful and productive resource endowments, such as Angola with its natural oil and mineral reserves. For many LEDCs, the main exports consist of relatively cheap agricultural products, so this hinders their ability to develop.
Countries that are able to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) will also 
enjoy higher levels of productivity. FDI should lead to an increase in the quantity and quality of physical capital in the economy, thereby boosting its productive capacity and competitiveness in the long run. This should help to create jobs, further creating economic development.
Differences in population growth
Rapid population growth (see Chapter 34) can limit any increase in real GDP as it reduces the GDP per capita. In addition, high population growth can hinder economic development as there are competing pressures on the earth’s scarce resources, such as agricultural land.
Some LEDCs, such as Niger, Rwanda, Bangladesh and Ethiopia, have large and/
or very fast-growing populations. This tends to reduce their GDP per capita, which limits their ability to develop economically. However, other LEDCs, such as Mali and Burkina Faso, do not have fast-growing populations (see Table 35.2).
Table 35.2 GDP per capita: selected LEDCs, 2017
GDP ($bn) Population (million) GDP per head ($)
Niger 7.566 18.64 406
Rwanda 8.341 12.99 642
Bangladesh 226.80 156.19 1,452
Ethiopia  69.22 102.37 676
Mali 14.10 17.47 807
Burkina Faso 12.01 19.51 616
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   255 24/01/18   11:18 AM35	 Differences 	in	economic 	Develo Pment 	between 	countries
256Differences in size of primary, secondary and tertiary 
sectors
Employment patterns are likely to change in the three production sectors as an 
economy develops.
» Primary sector output is concerned with the extraction of raw materials and other natural resources. Employment in this sector includes agricultural farming, fishing, mining and oil exploration. In LEDCs, primary sector activity tends to dominate in terms of output and employment.
» Secondary sector output involves manufacturing — that is, the use of natural resources to produce man-made resources such as machinery, vehicles, buildings and other capital goods. Examples of industries in this sector are car manufacturing, textile production, chemical engineering and textbook publishing. This is the predominant sector in most industrialising and developing countries.
» Tertiary sector output refers to the provision of services. Examples of professions in this sector are accountants, teachers, doctors, lawyers, financial advisers and retailers. The tertiary sector tends to be the most important in high-income economies.
As an economy develops, there tends to be a shift away from reliance on primary and secondary sector production towards tertiary output (see Table 35.3). In general, countries with a low level of GDP per capita are at the early stages of economic development, so most people work in the primary sector. As these countries advance, the majority of their GDP is generated from the secondary sector. Finally, in economically developed countries with high income per capita, the tertiary sector accounts for the largest share of employment and of the country’s GDP.
Table 35.3 Comparison of employment by sector: selected countries, 2017
Country Primary (%) Secondary (%) Tertiary (%)
Somalia 60.2 7.4 32.4
Kenya 32.7 18.0 49.3
China 8.6 39.8 51.6
India 16.6 29.9 45.5
United Arab Emirates 0.7 44.6 54.7
Luxembourg 0.2 11.1 88.7
Source: adapted from CIA, World Factbook
Differences in saving and investment
Savings (see Chapter 17) are required to give banks sufficient funds to lend to firms for investment purposes. However, most people in LEDCs are unable to have any savings as they barely have enough money to meet their basic needs. By contrast, the average person in more economically developed countries (MEDCs) is able to save some money. Firms are able to borrow these funds, via financial lenders such as banks, to pay for their investments. More savings and hence investments can contribute directly to economic development.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   256 24/01/18   11:18 AMFactors accounting for differences in economic development 
257In some countries, institutional changes to the banking, legal and political 
systems are needed in order for economic transactions to be carried out with 
relative ease. These changes are required to facilitate international trade, attract FDI and boost both consumer and business confi  dence (see Chapter 17).
Differences in education
The level of education in a country is an indicator of its economic development. Economists measure the mean (average) years of schooling and adult literacy rates in different countries for this purpose. In general, the greater the level of education in a country, the higher its standard of living tends to be.
Table 35.4 Education indicators: selected countries, 2017
Education indicators
Mean years of schooling 
(years)Adult literacy rate (% of population aged 15+)
USA 13.3 99
Norway 12.6 100
New Zealand 12.5 99
Ethiopia 2.0 35.1
Niger 1.4 28.7
Mozambique 1.2 56.1
Sources: United Nations Development Programme and CIA, World Factbook
Case study: Finland’s education system
Finland is often quoted as having the ‘best’ education system in the world, yet the 
country uses a rather unconventional approach to education. Finnish children do not have to start school until the age of 7. Children rarely take exams (they do not take a standardised test until the age of 16) and do not get regular homework until their teenage years. Science lessons are capped at 16 students to encourage greater productivity during class time. Teachers spend just 4 hours a day in the classroom, and 2 hours per week on their professional learning and development. 
Of course, a relatively small population of 5.5 million people helps. For example, there 
are fewer students in Finland (about 600,000) than in New York City (over 1.1 million), although they have the same number of teachers.
Activity
Discuss how economists might measure which education system in the world is the ‘best’.
Activity
Discuss how economists might measure which education system in the world is 
the ‘best’.
Differences in healthcare
Healthcare is a key indicator of economic development. The better the healthcare 
in a country, the greater social and economic wellbeing tends to be. The quality of a country’s healthcare can be measured in several ways, including the following:
» Life expectancy at birth. Life expectancy measures the number of years an 
average person in the country is expected to live.
» A country’s annual expenditure on healthcare as a percentage of its GDP.
» Child mortality rates — that is, the number of deaths of children aged 5 and 
below, per thousand of the population (see Table 35.5).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   257 24/01/18   11:18 AM35	 Differences	in	economic	DeveloPment	between	countries
258Table 35.5 Healthcare indicators: selected countries, 2017
Healthcare indicators
Life expectancy at birth (years), 
both gendersUnder-5 mortality rate (per 1000 live births)
Hong Kong 83.74 3
Japan 83.31 3
Italy 82.84 4
Switzerland 82.66 4
Sierra Leone 50.19 120
Lesotho 49.50 90
Swaziland 49.18 61
Sources: United Nations Development Programme and UNESCO
An increase in the quantity and quality of human capital through improved 
education and healthcare will boost the productivity of the labour force.
Exam-style question
Which option is least likely to increase productivity in an economy? [1]
A Advances in technology
B Greater specialisation of labourC Improved education and trainingD Longer working hours
Activity
In pairs, research the roles of the World Bank and the IMF in promoting economic 
development. How does the World Bank differ from the IMF? What are the terms and conditions of the loans that they make to countries? Be prepared to present your ﬁ  ndings to the class.
Activity
In pairs, research the roles of the World Bank and the IMF in promoting economic 
development. How does the World Bank differ from the IMF? What are the terms 
Exam-style question
Which of these is not a health indicator as a measure of economic 
development? [1]
A Child mortality rates
B Health care expenditure as a percentage of GDPC Life expectancy at birthD Population growth rate
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   258 24/01/18   11:18 AMFactors accounting for differences in economic development 
259Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by economic development?
2 How do differences in the national income of different countries affect their economic 
development?
3 What are the limitations of using only national income as an indicator of economic 
development?
4 What is productivity and how might this affect the level of economic development?5 How does population growth impact on a country’s economic development?6 Why do countries tend to move away from primary sector output as they develop?7 How do savings and investment contribute to economic development?8 How do a country’s mean years of schooling and adult literacy rate indicate its level 
of economic development?
9 What does a country’s quality of healthcare indicate about its economic wellbeing?
Revision checklist
✔ Economic development is an intangible concept that considers both 
quantitative and qualitative variables that indicate an increase in the 
standard of living within a country.
✔ The main factors that account for differences in the economic 
development of countries are differences in: income (GDP), productivity, population growth, the relative size of the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors, saving and investment, education and healthcare.
✔ Income is the most used single indicator of standard of living within a 
country. The wealthier a country is, the higher its standard of living tends to be.
✔ Differences in the productivity of factors of production can be explained 
by a country’s ability to gain access to the latest technologies, differences in the quality and quantity of production resources, and the country’s ability to attract FDI.
✔ Differences in population size and growth have a direct impact on real 
GDP per head. Economic development tends to be limited in countries with large and growing populations.
✔ As an economy develops, there tends to be a shift away from an 
overreliance on primary production, towards secondary sector production and then tertiary sector output.
✔ Savings are needed to enable banks to lend these funds to ﬁ  rms to 
ﬁ  nance their investment expenditure.
✔ In general, the greater the level of education in a country, the higher its 
standard of living tends to be.
✔ The better the healthcare in a country, the greater its social and 
economic wellbeing (and hence economic development) tends to be.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-05.indd   259 24/01/18   11:19 AMThis page intentionally left blank261
SECTION 6
International 
trade and globalisation
Chapters
36 International specialisation
37 Free trade and protection38 Foreign exchange rates39 Current account of balance of payments
In an increasingly globalised world, the trade between 
countries and the growth of multinational companies become ever more important. This ﬁ  nal section of the syllabus explores the principles of specialisation (at a national level), the role of and reasons for free trade, the role of multinational companies, foreign exchange rates and the balance of payments. There is also consideration of trade protection in order to safeguard the economy from unfair foreign competition.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   261 24/01/18   11:18 AM262
 36  International specialisation
Specialisation at a national level
Specialisation occurs when individuals, fi  rms, regions or countries concentrate on 
the production of a particular good or service. For example:
» Individuals — people might specialise, for example, as accountants, bankers, construction workers, hair stylists, dentists or engineers. Specialisation allows workers to become more skilled and effi  cient at their jobs, thus increasing the quantity and quality of the goods or services being provided. 
▲ Hair stylists are specialists in their fi  eld
Activity
Discuss why primary school teachers are less specialised than secondary school 
teachers, who are less specialised than university lecturers.
Activity
Discuss why primary school teachers are less specialised than secondary school 
teachers, who are less specialised than university lecturers.
» Firms — McDonald’s, Burger King, KFC and Pizza Hut specialise in the output 
of fast food, whereas DHL, FedEx and TNT specialise in the provision of courier services. Further examples appear in Table 36.1.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand specialisation at a national level
★ discuss the advantages and disadvantages of specialisation at a national 
level.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   262 24/01/18   11:18 AMSpecialisation at a national level
263Table 36.1 The world’s three largest producers in selected industries, 2017
Industry Rank
1st 2nd 3rd
Accountancy Deloitte PwC Ernst & Young
Airline (freight) FedEx Express Emirates SkyCargo UPS Airlines
Airline (passenger) American Airlines Delta Air Lines United Airlines
Car manufacture Volkswagen Toyota General Motors
e-commerce Amazon Google Facebook
4K HD TVs Samsung LG Sony
Mobile network operation China Mobile Vodafone Airtel
Mobile phones Samsung Apple Huawei
Personal computers Lenovo HP Dell
Restaurant chain (sales) McDonald’s Subway Burger King
Social network sites Facebook WhatsApp YouTube
» Regions — Silicon Valley in northern California, USA, specialises in the 
provision of high-tech information communication technologies; London, Tokyo 
and Shanghai are fi  nancial districts; Paris and Milan are major cities for fashion and design.
» Countries — international specialisation occurs when countries concentrate on the production of certain goods or services due to cost advantages (cheaper production methods) and their abundance of superior resources. Bangladesh and India are major producers and exporters of textiles; Scotland is famous for its whisky; Thailand and Vietnam specialise in the production of rice; and Caribbean countries such as Jamaica and Tobago specialise in tourism. Other examples are outlined in Table 36.2.
Table 36.2 The world’s three largest producers of selected products, 2017
Product Rank
1st 2nd 3rd
Aluminium China Russia Canada
Coal China USA Australia
Coffee Brazil Vietnam Indonesia
Copper Chile USA Peru
Cotton China India USA
Fruit China India Brazil
Meat China USA Brazil
Oil Saudi Arabia Venezuela Iran
Rubber Thailand China Indonesia
Sugar Brazil India China
Tea China India Kenya
Vegetables China India USA
Source: The Economist Pocket World in Figures
▲ Hollywood, Los Angeles, 
USA, is famous for its motion pictures industry
Deﬁ  nition
International specialisation occurs when countries concentrate on the production of certain goods or services due to cost advantages, perhaps due to their abundance of resources.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   263 24/01/18   11:18 AM36	 international	specialisation
264
Activity
Discuss how specialisation might work in schools, restaurants and supermarkets. What 
are the advantages and disadvantages of specialisation to the employees and fi  rms in these markets?
Activity
Discuss how specialisation might work in schools, restaurants and supermarkets. What 
are the advantages and disadvantages of specialisation to the employees and fi  rms in 
Advantages and disadvantages of 
specialisation at a national level
Advantages of specialisation
The benefi  ts of specialisation at a national level include the following:
» Effi  ciency gains — specialisation makes better use of scarce resources. As a 
result, productivity increases, thereby increasing the country’s GDP. Taiwan and South Korea, for example, have been able to raise their standards of living by specialising in the production of manufactured consumer electronic devices. Taiwan’s Foxconn is the world’s largest manufacturer of smartphones and tablet computers for companies such as Samsung and Apple.
» Labour productivity — workers become more skilled in the jobs they do because they are able to concentrate on what they do best. Therefore, specialisation improves labour productivity (see Chapter 21) and enables better-quality products to be produced. Thus specialisation can benefi  t fi  rms, regions and the country as a whole.
» Increased productive capacity — specialisation can help to shift the production possibility curve of a country outwards due to its increased productive capacity, as shown in Figure 36.1. Thus, specialisation leads to increased national output.
OPPC1PPC2Output of goods
Output of servicesBy specialising, the country’s PPC will
shift outwards. In this case, as the
country chooses to specialise in theoutput of services, there is a largershift along the x-axis as the economymoves from 
PPC1 to PPC2.      
▲ Figure 36.1 Specialisation and the PPC
» Economies of scale — specialisation increases GDP and global trade. 
Therefore, fi  rms are able to enjoy cost-saving benefi  ts from large-scale 
operations, known as economies of scale (see Chapter 20). This can help to keep prices down and therefore control infl  ation (see Chapter 31).
» Improved competitiveness — specialisation helps to enhance international 
trade and exchange. Competitive prices also improve the international competitiveness of a country, thereby boosting its economic growth. In this way, specialisation and trade are vital for improving a country’s standard of living (see Chapter 32).Study tip
While this chapter 
considers the advantages and disadvantages of specialisation at a national level, remember that specialisation can also apply to individuals, fi  rms, regions, machinery and technology (capital equipment).
Activity
Investigate the economic 
reasons behind China’s rising dominance in one of the following industries (or another one of your choice): coal mining, oil, steel, automobiles, commercial banking, insurance or telecommunications. Be prepared to share your fi  ndings with the rest of the class.
Activity
Investigate the economic 
reasons behind China’s 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   264 24/01/18   11:18 AMAdvantages and disadvantages of specialisation at a national level
265Disadvantages of specialisation
Despite the potential benefi  ts of national specialisation, there are several 
drawbacks.
» Overspecialisation can cause regional and structural unemployment (see Chapter 30). The Full Monty, a British movie which cost only $3.5 million to produce but made over $250 million at the box offi  ce, was about six unemployed men in the once-successful steel mills in Sheffi  eld, UK. Although the fi  lm was produced as a comedy, it featured some key consequences of the collapse of steel production in the UK, such as regional unemployment, stress, depression and suicide. 
    Countries that overspecialise also suffer the most during an economic 
downturn as they do not have a variety of goods and services that they can rely on to survive. For example, Liberia is highly dependent on its agricultural output, which accounted for around 61 per cent of its GDP in 2017. Adverse weather conditions could wipe out much of its agricultural production, thus 
severely harming the economy.
» Lack of variety for consumers — specialisation often leads to standardised, 
mass-produced goods. An example is Foxconn, which manufactures the iPhone and iPad for Apple. These devices lack variety and only come in one of two colours. Domestic customers may look at alternative imported products from 
foreign suppliers, thereby reducing the competitiveness of domestic fi  rms that overspecialise.
» High labour turnover —  this occurs if lots of workers choose to leave their 
jobs in search of more challenging and less boring ones. Where a country has a labour turnover rate of 12.5 per cent, this means that one worker in every eight changes jobs each year. The higher the turnover rate, the more expensive it is for the economy as fi  rms have to continually hire and train workers. Industries that suffer from high labour turnover tend to pay low wages to low-skilled workers, such as those working in call centres, retailing, catering (including fast-food restaurants), supermarkets and hotels.
» Low labour mobility —  low-skilled and poorly paid workers tend to receive 
little training, so may not develop the necessary skills to fi  nd alternative jobs. 
Again, this can lead to structural unemployment in the economy. Highly skilled and specialised workers, such as pilots, dentists, software developers, fi  nancial advisers and attorneys can also fi  nd it extremely diffi  cult to change to alternative professions and careers. A lack of labour market fl  exibility in an economy can reduced its overall effi  ciency and international competitiveness.
» Higher labour costs —  fi  rms that employ workers with highly specialised skills 
tend to face very high salary demands. For example, Forbes magazine estimates that in 2017 the earnings of the world’s ten highest-paid supermodels exceeded $100 million, with Gisele Bündchen earning about $45 million. Dwayne Johnson, Hollywood’s highest-paid actor, earned in excess of $64.5 million in 2017 (that’s over $1.24 million per week!). However, high labour costs can have a negative impact on the profi  ts of fi  rms and potentially reduce their competitiveness.
Deﬁ  nition
Overspecialisation occurs 
when an individual, fi  rm, region or country concentrates too much on producing a very limited number of goods and services. This exposes the economic agent to a far higher degree of risk.
▲ Staffordshire used to 
have a thriving pottery industry (another example of overspecialisation) — now the area is full of derelict factories
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   265 24/01/18   11:18 AM36	 international	specialisation
266
▲ In 2017, Dwayne Johnson earned $ 64.5 million dollars, making him Hollywood's highest-paid 
actor
Exam-style questions
1 a Defi  ne the term ‘specialisation’. [2]
b  Explain why, during a recession, highly specialised fi  rms are less 
likely to survive than diversifi  ed fi  rms. [4]
2 a  Explain how the concept of specialisation can explain why nations 
trade with each other. [4]
b  ‘Specia lisation in international trade always benefi  ts nations.’ 
Analyse this statement. [6]
Chapter review questions
1 What is meant by specialisation at a national level?
2 What are two examples of national specialisation?3 How does the concept of national specialisation foster international trade?4 What are the advantages of national specialisation?5 What are the disadvantages of specialisation at a national level?
Revision checklist
✔ Specialisation occurs when individuals, ﬁ  rms, regions or countries 
concentrate on the production of a particular good or service.
✔ International specialisation occurs when countries concentrate on the 
production of certain goods or services due to cost advantages and 
superior resource allocation.
✔ Beneﬁ  ts of specialisation at a national level include: efﬁ  ciency gains, 
higher labour productivity, increased productive capacity, economies of scale and improved competitiveness.
✔ Disadvantages of specialisation at a national level include: 
overspecialisation, lack of variety for consumers, high labour turnover, low labour mobility and higher labour costs.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   266 24/01/18   11:18 AM267
 37  Globalisation, free trade and 
protection
By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne globalisation
★ explain the role of multinational companies (MNCs)
★ explain the beneﬁ  ts of free trade for consumers, producers and the 
economy
★ understand the various methods of protection
★ explain the reasons for protection 
★ discuss the consequences of protection.
Globalisation
Globalisation is the process by which the world’s economies become increasingly 
interdependent and interconnected due to greater international trade and cultural exchanges. Globalisation has increased the exchange of goods and services throughout the world. Globalised markets include fast food, fi  nancial markets, motor vehicles, consumer electronics, sports (such as football) and entertainment (such as Hollywood movies).
Globalisation has existing for a very long time, but has intensifi  ed. The 
increased use of social media and the continued expansion of multinational companies have contributed to the globalisation process.
Globalisation has resulted in positive and negative impacts:
» There is increased international trade, creating wealth and jobs throughout the 
world.
» There is freer movement of labour, capital, goods and services.
» By operating on a global scale, fi  rms can enjoy greater economies of scale 
(lower costs per unit when operating on a larger scale).
» There is greater choice of goods and services for consumers around the world.
» There is greater cultural understanding and appreciation.
» However, globalisation has led to greater dependence on the global economy.
» It has also widened income and wealth gaps between the world’s poorest 
countries and the world’s richest nations (see Chapter 35).
Role of multinational companies 
A multinational corporation (MNC) is an organisation that operates in two or more countries. Examples of some of the largest MNCs in the world are: Apple, Exxon Mobil, Johnson & Johnson, Coca-Cola and Volkswagen.
Various factors have made it easier for MNCs to operate on a global scale. These 
include lower transportation costs, advances in technology such as e-commerce, more effi  cient communication systems and trade liberation.
Deﬁ  nition
Globalisation is the 
process by which the world’s economies become increasingly interdependent and interconnected.
Deﬁ  nition
A multinational corporation is an organisation that operates in two or more countries.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   267 24/01/18   11:18 AM37	 Globalisation, 	free 	trade 	and	protection
268The costs and benefits of MNCs
There are advantages and disadvantages of operating as a multinational 
corporation. MNCs also create costs and benefits to their host and home countries. 
Advantages
The advantages of multinational corporations include the following:
» Through job creation, MNCs are able to help improve standards of living in the countries in which they operate. For example, Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, employs over 2.3 million people worldwide.
» MNCs operate on a very large scale and are therefore able to exploit economies of scale (see Chapter 20). This means that MNCs can pass on cost savings to their customers in the form of lower prices.
» By operating in overseas markets, MNCs are able to generate more profit by selling to a larger customer base. This benefits their home country too as profits are repatriated.
» MNCs are able to spread risks by operating in overseas markets. For example, adverse trading conditions in one part of the world can be offset by more favourable circumstances in other parts of the world.
» By producing in a foreign country, an MNC is often able to avoid any trade restrictions. For example, Japan’s Honda is able to avoid import taxes in the European Union as it has manufacturing plants in Belgium, Italy and France.
»  MNCs can access new markets by locating overseas and this may reduce transportation costs as they no longer have to export products to these markets. For example, Japanese car manufacturers Honda, Nissan and Toyota all have factories in China — the world’s largest market for private cars.
»  MNCs might choose to move or expand their operations in foreign countries to benefit from lower rates of corporation tax. This benefits both the MNC and the countries into which it chooses to expand. For example, corporation tax is far lower in Hong Kong, Singapore and Bahrain than in Japan, Australia and the UK. 
Disadvantages
The disadvantages of multinational corporations include the following:
» Multinational corporations have often been criticised for their unethical and cost-cutting practices, such as poor working conditions and low wages for workers in low-income countries.
» While jobs might be created in overseas countries, MNCs can force local firms that are less competitive to close down. Their huge market power and ability to exploit economies of scale (see Chapter 20) mean that local firms might struggle to compete. Moving and expanding overseas can also have a detrimental impact on domestic employment. 
» Since many MNCs earn far higher sales revenue than the gross domestic product (see Chapter 29) of the host country, they are often in a powerful position to exploit foreign governments over decisions such as the location of the business and access to finance (government subsidies, grants, loans and tax concessions).
▲ A Levi’s store at AlphaOne shopping mall  
in Amritsar, India
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   268 24/01/18   11:18 AMThe benefits of free trade
269» The overreliance on MNCs in low-income countries means that there are major 
consequences should a MNC choose to relocate its operations to another 
country. For example, in 2010 French supermarket chain Carrefour pulled out of Thailand and Malaysia, resulting in job losses.
» MNCs face an array of issues as a result of operating in different countries, such 
as different legal systems, tax regulations and environmental guidelines. The lack of local knowledge can also cause major problems for an MNC.
» The sheer size and geographic spread of an MNC’s operations makes it harder to 
manage the overall business. Effective communication can also be an issue if workers are located in countries with different languages, national cultures and time zones.
» Fluctuating exchange rates (see Chapter 38) can make it diffi  cult to measure 
and compare the values of an MNC’s sales and profi  ts in overseas markets.
» MNCs may be unsuccessful if they offer goods and services that do not appeal 
to local tastes and customs. For example, British retailer Tesco closed all of its US branch’s ‘Fresh & Easy’ supermarkets between 2013 and 2015 as they were struggling to become profi  table.
Activity
Research the global operations of an MNC that operates in your country and assess 
the advantages and disadvantages to the fi  rm and the host country. Make a judgement about whether the benefi  ts to the host country outweigh the costs. 
Activity
Research the global operations of an MNC that operates in your country and assess 
the advantages and disadvantages to the fi  rm and the host country. Make a judgement 
Exam-style questions
Multinational companies are attracted to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
because of its low taxes, political stability and high GDP per capita. Examples of MNCs in the UAE are Microsoft, Marriott Group, DHL and Ericsson, along with a number of international engineering, law and accountancy fi  rms. An infl  ux of MNCs to the area brings workers from many countries and this creates a demand for international goods, services and schools. There are many shopping malls fi  lled with international brands and Dubai (one of the seven Emirates that make up the UAE) has gained a reputation as a destination for shopping. This has attracted many tourists to Dubai for shopping and leisure trips.
a Explain the characteristics of a multinational company. [4]
b Analyse the benefi  ts and costs of MNCs locating in the UAE. [6]
The benefi  ts of free trade
International trade refers to the exchange of goods and services beyond national 
borders. It entails the sale of exports (goods and services sold to overseas buyers) and imports (foreign goods and services bought by domestic households and fi  rms). 
Free trade means that international trade can take place without any forms of 
protection (barriers to international trade), such as quantitative limits or taxes being imposed on exports.
Deﬁ  nitions
International trade refers 
to the exchange of goods and services beyond national borders.Free trade means that international trade takes place without protectionist measures (barriers to international trade).
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   269 24/01/18   11:18 AM37	 Globalisation,	free	trade	and	protection
270The merits of international trade (that is, the reasons why 
countries trade with each other) apply to consumers, producers and 
the economy as a whole. These advantages include the following:
»  Access to resources —  international trade enables producers 
and consumers to gain access to goods and services that they cannot produce themselves. For example, the Maldives can purchase laptop computers, motor vehicles and Hollywood movies from the USA.
»  Lower prices — free trade reduces the costs of trading. For example, it is cheaper for Germans to purchase foreign-produced smartphones made in China and Taiwan because of the high labour costs in Germany. Unfavourable weather conditions in Sweden mean it is better off importing tropical fruits from Jamaica. By contrast, trade protection increases the costs of trading. For example, the imposition of trade barriers would mean that both domestic fi  rms and consumers have to pay more for imported goods and services.
» Economies of scale —  as fi  rms are operating on a larger scale in global 
markets, international trade enables them to benefi  t from economies of scale (see Chapter 20). These cost savings can be passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices and/or kept by the producers in the form of higher profi  ts.
» Greater choice — free trade enables consumers and fi  rms to access a larger variety of goods and services from different producers around the world. For example, while Germans can choose from domestic motor vehicles such as Audi, BMW and Mercedes-Benz, they are also able to choose from foreign suppliers such as Lexus (Japan), Jaguar (India) and Cadillac (USA).
» Increased market size — international trade enables fi  rms to earn higher revenues and profi  ts. For example, American fi  rms can sell products to a domestic market of 322 million people, whereas they can reach a market of more than 2.7 billion potential customers by selling their products to China and India.
» Effi  ciency gains — free trade forces domestic producers to focus on improving the quality of their output due to foreign competition. For example, competition from Japanese car makers and South Korean electronics fi  rms has forced American producers such as General Motors and Apple to create better-quality products. By contrast, protectionist measures give domestic fi  rms a false sense of security and limit their exposure to fair and genuine competition. This can make domestic fi  rms ineffi  cient.
» Improved international relations —  the absence of trade barriers encourages 
international trade and cooperation between countries. By contrast, if a country imposes trade barriers, other nations are likely to retaliate by doing the same.
Activities 
1 Look at some of the products you have at home, such as a television, watch, car and 
clothes. How many have these products have been imported? Why might this be?
2 Use the internet to investigate the types of goods and services that are exported and 
imported from one high-income country and one low-income country of your choice. 
Find out the main trading partners of these countries. As a starting point, you may want to use 
The Economist’s  country briefs (www.economist.com) and/or the CIA 
website (http://goo.gl/wGmYn).
Activities 
1
 Look at some of the products you have at home, such as a television, watch, car and 
clothes. How many have these products have been imported? Why might this be?
Study tip
Make sure you can 
distinguish between the merits of international trade and the merits of free trade — they are not quite the same, as all not international trade entails free trade. Thus, the advantages of free trade (without any trade barriers) are greater than the benefi  ts of international trade (which may entail some trade barriers).
▲ People queuing outside a job centre in Spain
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   270 24/01/18   11:18 AMProtection
271Exam-style questions
Bangladesh is one of the world’s largest producers of rice and tropical fruit. In 
Brunei Darussalam, crude oil and natural gas account for around 90 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product. This makes Brunei Darussalam one of the leading producers of oil in Southeast Asia.
a Describe one problem for Brunei Darussalam in relying on oil exports. [2]
b Explain two reasons why countries such as Bangladesh and Brunei Darussalam 
trade with each other. [4]
c Analyse how Bangladesh’s export of rice and tropical fruit helps its farmers 
to achieve economies of scale. [6]
Protection
Despite the benefi  ts of free trade, there are also strategic and economic reasons for trade protection. Protection refers to the use of trade barriers to restrain foreign trade, thereby limiting overseas competition. 
Methods of protection
The most common type of trade protection is tariffs. The other types of trade protection, collectively known as non-tariff barriers, include import quotas, subsidies and embargoes. These are explained below.
» Tariffs — a tariff is a tax on imports. For example, the USA places a 35 per cent tariff on all tyres imported from China. Tariffs increase the costs of production to importers, thus raising the price of foreign goods in the domestic market and lowering the quantity of products imported (see Figure 37.1).
P2
P1
OutputPrice ($)
Q2 Q1S2
DS1
OThe tariff raises costs
of production, so itshifts the supply curvefrom 
S1 to S2. This
leads to prices of theimport rising from 
P1 to
P2, and output falling
from Q1 to Q2.
▲ Figure 37.1 The impact of tariffs
» Import quotas — an import quota sets a quantitative limit on the sale of a 
foreign good in a country. For example, the Indonesian government imposes import quotas on fruits and vegetables from Thailand. The quota limits the quantity imported and thus raises the market price of foreign goods (see Figure 37.2). 
Deﬁ  nitions
Protection refers to the 
use of trade barriers to restrain foreign trade, thereby limiting overseas competition.A tariff is a tax on imports, which increases production costs for foreign fi  rms.
Deﬁ  nition
An import quota is a quantitative limit on the sale of a foreign good.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   271 24/01/18   11:18 AM37	 Globalisation,	free	trade	and	protection
272P2
P1
OutputPrice ($)
Q2 Q1S2
DS1
OThe imposition of a
quota at Q2 reduces the
supply of the import from
S1 to S2 (where supply is
perfectly price inelastic).This leads to the price ofthe import rising from 
P1
to P2, and output falling
from Q1 to Q2. 
▲ Figure 37.2 The impact of import quotas
» Subsidies — governments can provide subsidies (lump-sum payments or 
cheap loans to domestic producers) to help domestic fi  rms to compete against foreign imports. Subsidies lower the costs of production for home fi  rms, thereby helping to protect local jobs. For example, the European Union subsidises its farmers to encourage agricultural output (see Figure 37.3).
P1
P2
OutputPrice ($)
Q1 Q2S1
DS2
OThe subsidy reduces
costs of production, soit shifts the supplycurve from 
S1 to S2.
This leads to a fall inprice of the exportfrom 
P1 to P2, and
output increases from
Q1 to Q2.
▲ Figure 37.3 The impact of subsidies
» Embargo — an embargo is a ban on trade with a certain country, often due to 
a trade dispute or political confl  ict. An embargo rarely benefi  ts local consumers, who suffer from a lack of choice and higher prices (due to the lack of supply). For example, Malaysia has imposed trade embargoes on the Philippines while the USA has trade embargoes with Cuba.
» Rules and regulations — countries often use bureaucratic rules and regulations as a form of protection. Examples are strict rules regarding food safety, environmental standards and product quality. These rules and regulations consume a lot of time and increase the costs for overseas fi  rms, while also helping to protect domestic consumers.
Deﬁ  nition
A subsidy is a form of 
government fi  nancial assistance to help cut production costs of domestic fi  rms, enabling them to compete against foreign producers.
Deﬁ  nition
An embargo is a ban on trade with a certain country.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   272 24/01/18   11:18 AMProtection
273Exam-style questions
1 British beef is sold throughout the world. Using an appropriate demand 
and supply diagram, explain the consequences on the price and quantity demanded of British beef if an import tariff is imposed on British beef.
 [4]
2 Different stakeholders are affected by the imposition of an import tariff. Discuss the impacts of an import tariff on producers and consumers of  British beef.
 [8]
Arguments for protection
Protectionist measures may be introduced because they offer the following advantages:
» Protectionist measures help to safeguard infant industries (new, unestablished businesses) from foreign competition. The Chinese government, for example, only allows 20 Hollywood movies to enter the country’s cinemas each year, thus allowing the Chinese movie industry to develop.
»  Protection from free trade can also help to safeguard domestic jobs. French car maker Renault made 7500 workers unemployed between 2013 and 2016, partly due to the higher sales of Japan’s Toyota across Europe. In extreme cases, fierce competition from foreign rivals can even force domestic firms out of business.
»  It prevents foreign countries from dumping their goods in the domestic economy. Dumping occurs when foreign firms sell their products in large quantities at prices deliberately below those charged by domestic firms, often even below the cost of production. This clearly gives the foreign firms an unfair price advantage, so protectionist measures may be needed. The European Union has accused China of dumping its glass solar panels and the USA has accused Vietnam of dumping its shrimps.
» Protection can be a source of government revenue. For example, India imposes tariff of $535 per 10 grams on the import of gold, thus helping to raise tax revenue for the government.
» Protection might also be required to overcome a balance of payments deficit (see Chapter 39). If a country’s expenditure on imports exceeds the revenue earned from its exports, the country will experience problems as it spends more than it earns. Protectionist measures to restrict imports would help to deal with this imbalance.
» In terms of strategic arguments, the government might use protectionism to safeguard the country from being too dependent on goods and services from other countries. For instance, if a war were to break out then protectionist measures give the country the ability and capacity to produce all the goods and services that it needs, rather than having to rely on foreign countries. A country such as Canada or the UK might want to have more oil production in order to be less reliant on imports from oil-rich nations that have the ability to distort world oil prices and oil supplies. 
▲ Lost in Thailand is China’s highest-
grossing home-grown film. Trade protection enables the Chinese movie industry to develop
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   273 24/01/18   11:18 AM37	 Globalisation,	free	trade	and	protection
274Exam-style questions
China accounts for over 25 per cent of the world’s output of car tyres. Since 
2009, it has been the world’s largest producer, consumer and exporter of tyres. The China Passenger Car Association reported that over 24 million new cars were sold in China in 2016, with annual sales growth of 10 per cent expected over the next few years. 
According to the USA’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average US employer 
had to pay about $35 per hour (salary and benefi  ts) to hire a production-line worker whereas an employer in China could do the same for just $1.36 per hour. The USA simply cannot compete, thus prompting the need for protectionist measures.
a With reference to the above information, explain two reasons why countries 
use trade protection. [4]
b Discuss which method of trade protection would be best for the USA to 
impose. [8]
Arguments against protectionism
Despite the merits of protectionism, there are potential drawbacks. These 
disadvantages include the following:
» Government intervention distorts market signals and therefore can lead to a 
global misallocation of resources. For example, domestic consumers may not be able to purchase lower-priced imports which are of higher quality than those produced domestically. Protected fi  rms and industries can become too reliant on the government and thus become ineffi  cient.
» Protection can lead to increased costs of production due to the lack of 
competition and incentives to be innovative. Domestic producers may need to pay higher prices for vital imported raw materials and components, so this could lead to imported infl  ation (see Chapter 31), thus leading to higher domestic prices.
» Other countries are likely to react by retaliating and imposing their own trade 
barriers. For example, in October 2012 the US International Trade Commission imposed tariffs on imports of solar cells from China and by January 2013 Beijing had imposed a 5-year anti-dumping tariff on two chemicals (ethylene glycol and diethylene glycol) from the USA. Such actions may hinder global economic growth and prosperity.
Case study: The Banana Wars
The Banana Wars were a trade dispute between the 
European Union and Latin American countries that lasted for two decades, making it one of the longest trade disputes since the Second World War. Latin American banana exporters argued that an EU tariff imposed against them was unfair. It had been introduced to protect banana growers in former European colonies, which were exempt from the tariff. 
A formal agreement ending the dispute was signed in 
late 2012 between the EU and ten Latin American countries. The EU agreed to reduce its tariffs on imported bananas from /Euro.fitted176 ($230) per tonne to /Euro.fitted114 ($148) over eight years. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   274 24/01/18   11:18 AMProtection
275
Activi ty 
Use the internet to investigate the following:
a What is the World Trade Organization (WTO)?
b What are the main functions of the WTO?c How effective has the WTO been in encouraging 
free trade?
Activi
Use the internet to investigate the following:
Chapter review questions
1 What is globalisation?2 What are multinational companies?3 What are the advantages of disadvantages of MNCs?4 What is free trade?5 What are the merits of free trade?6 Why is trade protection used?7 How do tariff and non-tariff trade barriers differ?
Revision checklist
✔ Globalisation is the process by which the world’s economies become 
increasingly interdependent and interconnected.
✔ A multinational corporation (MNC) is an organisation that operates in 
two or more countries.
✔ Advantages of MNCs include: job creation, economies of scale and 
spreading of risks.
✔ Disadvantages of MNCs include: unethical and cost-cutting practices, 
forcing domestic ﬁ  rms out of business, and potential to exploit foreign 
governments (especially those in low-income countries).
✔ International trade is the exchange of goods and services beyond 
national borders.
✔ Free trade means that international trade takes place without 
protectionist measures (barriers to international trade).
✔ Advantages of free trade include: access to resources (choice), lower 
prices, efﬁ  ciency gains and improved international relations.
✔ Protection refers to the use of trade barriers to restrain foreign trade, 
thereby limiting overseas competition.
✔ Methods of protection include: tariffs and non-tariff barriers (import 
quotas, subsidies and embargoes).
✔ Reasons for protection include: to protect infant industries and 
safeguard domestic jobs, to prevent dumping, to generate tax revenue, to tackle a balance of payments deﬁ  cit and for strategic reasons.
✔ Arguments against protection include: market distortions and 
inefﬁ  ciencies, higher production costs for domestic suppliers relying on imported supplies, and possible retaliation from foreign countries.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   275 24/01/18   11:18 AM276
 38  Foreign exchange rates
Foreign exchange rates
An exchange rate refers to the price of one currency measured in terms of other 
currencies. For example, the exchange rate of the US dollar in terms of the pound sterling might be $1.35 = £1 (or $1 = £0.74). This means that a British tourist spending $600 on hotel accommodation in the USA would have spent the 
equivalent of £444.44 ($600 ÷ 1.35). 
Exchange rates can change over time, so if the US dollar fell against the pound 
sterling to $1.50 = £1, then the tourist would pay £400 ($600 ÷ 1.5) for staying 
at the hotel in the USA. In other words, the British tourist would pay the same price in US dollars, but this equates to fewer pound sterling.
Activities 
1 Use www.oanda.com (or another relevant internet website) to fi  nd which country 
uses the following currencies:
a ringgitb dongc lekd wone kwacha
2 How many countries can you fi  nd that use these currencies?
a pesob realc poundd france dollar
Activities 
1
 Use 
uses the following currencies:
Exam-style questions
1 Suppose the exchange rate between the Australian dollar (AUD) and the 
Chinese yuan renminbi (CNY) is AUD1 = CNY6.5. Calculate the price in 
renminbi for customers in China buying textbooks priced at AUD65 from Australia. [2]
2 Suppose that the exchange rate between the Canadian dollar (CAD) and 
the British pound (GBP) is CAD1 = GBP0.65 and the exchange rate between the Canadian dollar and the euro (EUR) is CAD1 = EUR0.75. Calculate the exchange rate of the British pound against the euro. [2]
Deﬁ  nition
An exchange rate refers to 
the price of one currency measured in terms of other currencies.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ deﬁ  ne foreign exchange rates
★ explain the determination of foreign exchange rates
★ explain the causes of foreign exchange rate ﬂ  uctuations
★ explain the consequences of foreign exchange rate ﬂ  uctuations
★ distinguish between ﬂ  oating and ﬁ  xed foreign exchange rate systems.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   276 24/01/18   11:19 AMDetermination of exchange rates in foreign exchange market 
277Determination of exchange rates in foreign 
exchange market 
In theory, the demand for exports of goods and services increases if exports 
become cheaper. Likewise, the demand for imports falls if the price of imports rises. Since different countries use different forms of money, exchange rates are fundamental in facilitating international trade (see Chapter 37).
Consider the following as an example. Table 38.1 shows that the price of a 
64GB iPad is HKD6000 (Hong Kong dollars). Study the impact that fluctuations in the exchange rate of the pound sterling have on the price of the iPad for British tourists in Hong Kong.
Table 38.1 The price of an iPad at different exchange rates (GBP  : HKD)
Exchange rate 
(GBP  : HKD)HKD price ($) GBP price (£)
£1 = $10.5 6,000 571.43
£1 = $11.5 6,000 521.74
£1 = $12.5 6,000 480.00
£1 = $13.5 6,000 444.44
Hence, as the exchange rate of the pound sterling increases from $10.5 to $13.5, 
the price of the iPad falls from £571.43 to £444.44 for the British tourist in Hong Kong. This means that as the value of a country’s currency rises, its demand for imports tends to increase. Hong Kong’s exports to the UK should therefore increase.
Looking at this from the perspective of Hong Kong, the fall in its exchange rate 
(from $10.5 = £1 to $13.5 = £1) means that imports will become more expensive. For instance, suppose that a Hong Kong supermarket imports supplies from the UK. An order valued at £50,000 used to cost the Hong Kong firm HK$525,000 (i.e. £50,000 × $10.5), but will now cost $675,000 (i.e. £50,000 × $13.5). This means that as the value of a country’s currency falls, its demand for imports tends to fall. The UK’s exports to Hong Kong should therefore fall.
However, the demand for some imports is price inelastic (see Chapter 11) 
because they are not readily available in the domestic economy yet are essential for production (such as oil and other vital raw materials). Therefore, domestic firms have to spend more on these essential imports when the exchange rate falls in value. For example, if the Mexican peso (MXN) falls against the Canadian dollar (CAD) from 12.5:1 to 14:1, then Mexican firms buying Canadian oil at a price of CAD100 per barrel pay a higher price of MXN1400 per barrel instead of the previous price of MXN1250 per barrel. This means Mexican firms may need to reduce their price by around 12 per cent to remain competitive, despite their higher costs of production resulting from the fall in the value of the Mexican peso.
In the same way that changes in the exchange rate can affect the demand 
for exports and imports, they can also affect the amount of tourism revenue, the profitability of businesses and therefore the rates of unemployment and economic growth.
▲ Demand for oil is price 
inelastic, so it is not very 
responsive to exchange rate fluctuations
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   277 24/01/18   11:19 AM38	 foreiGn	exchanGe	rates
278Floating and fixed exchange rate systems
There are two broad exchange rate systems: fl  oating and fi  xed.
Floating exchange rate systems
In the fl  oating exchange rate system, the value of a currency is determined 
by the market forces of demand for the currency and supply of the currency. For example, overseas tourists buy (demand) the foreign currency by selling their domestic currency. Countries that adopt this system allow the value of their currency to be determined by market forces. Examples are Belgium, Chile, Luxembourg, Spain, Japan, New Zealand, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
D2
D1SPrice (GBP per NZD)
Quantity (NZD)0.550.65
O
▲ Figure 38.1 Changes in interest rates and the impact on exchange rates
If banks in New Zealand offer investors higher interest rates than those in the 
UK, this can cause investors to take advantage by buying the New Zealand dollar (NZD). This will increase the demand for the NZD, thus shifting its demand from D
1 to D 2 in Figure 38.1. This raises the price (or exchange rate) 
of the NZD from £0.55 to £0.66. By contrast, a fall in interest rates is likely to drive investors away as they search for investments that generate better a fi  nancial return.
In a fl  oating exchange rate system, there is an appreciation in the 
exchange rate if the exchange rate is rising against other currencies. By contrast, there is a depreciation of the exchange rate if its value falls against other currencies.
Fixed exchange rate systems
Under a fi  xed exchange rate system, the government intervenes in foreign exchange markets to maintain its exchange rate at a predetermined level. For example, the Hong Kong dollar has been pegged (fi  xed) against the US dollar since 1972. Since 1983 the HKD has been pegged to both the USD (at a rate of HKD7.8 = USD1) and the Macanese pataca (MOP) (at a rate of HKD1 = MOP1.03). 
The main advantage of fi  xing exchange rates is that it reduces uncertainties 
for international trade. This allows fi  rms, both foreign and domestic, to be certain about future costs and prices, thereby encouraging international trade and exchange.
Deﬁ  nition
A ﬂ  oating exchange rate 
system means that the currency is allowed to fl  uctuate against other currencies according to market forces, without any government intervention.
Deﬁ  nitions
Appreciation of a currency occurs when there is an increase in its value relative to another currency operating in a fl  oating exchange rate system.Depreciation of a currency occurs when there is a fall in its value relative to another currency operating in a fl  oating exchange rate system.A ﬁ  xed exchange rate system exists when the central bank (or monetary authority) buys and sells foreign currencies to ensure the value of its currency stays at the pegged value.A foreign exchange market is the marketplace where different currencies can be bought and sold.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   278 24/01/18   11:19 AMCauses of exchange rate fluctuations
279S
DPrice (HKD per USD)
Quantit y (HKD)7.8
O
▲ Figure 38.2 The fi  xed exchange system
In Figure 38.2, the exchange rate between the USD and the HKD is fi  xed (or 
‘pegged’) at HK$7.8 = US$1 (although it is allowed to fl  uctuate within a small range of HK$7.75 to HK$7.85). This is achieved by the respective governments buying and selling foreign currencies to maintain this ‘peg’. 
For example, if the HKD declines against the pegged USD, the Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority (HKMA) can raise its value by increasing the demand for its currency. To prevent the HKD falling from 7.8 to 7.7, perhaps due to speculators selling the HKD, the HKMA intervenes in the foreign exchange market by buying enough HKD (thus raising its price) to maintain the exchange rate at the fi  xed rate of 7.8. Similarly, the HKMA would sell HKD if the exchange rate were to approach 7.9 (increasing the supply of HKD in order to reduce its price). This function of central banks (see Chapter 16) requires careful management and plenty of currency reserves. 
There are two main criticisms of a fi  xed exchange rate system:
» It reduces the country’s ability to use monetary policy changes in order to 
affect the economy (which is particularly useful during an economic recession). 
» There is a huge opportunity cost in using large amounts of foreign exchange 
reserves to maintain the fi  xed rate.
It is possible to change the pegged rate over time. For example, the HKD was originally fi  xed at HK$5.65 = USD1 back in 1972. As the USA’s economy developed, its currency was revalued to HK$7.8. In a fi  xed exchange rate system, there is a revaluation of the exchange rate if it is raised against other currencies. By contrast, the exchange rate is devalued under a fi  xed exchange rate system if the value of the currency is reduced against other currencies.
Causes of exchange rate fl  uctuations
Any factor that infl  uences the demand for a currency or its supply will have an impact on the exchange rate. These factors include the following:
» Changes in demand for exports — an increase in the demand for exports, perhaps due to improved quality or successful advertising, will increase the demand for the country’s currency. Therefore, this increases the exchange rate.
» Changes in demand for imports — an increase in the demand for imports, 
perhaps due to an increase in the competitiveness of foreign fi  rms, will raise the value of the foreign currency in order to facilitate the purchase of foreign goods and services.
Deﬁ  nitions
Devaluation occurs when 
the price of a currency operating in a fi  xed exchange rate system is offi  cially and deliberately lowered.Revaluation occurs when the price of a currency operating in a fi  xed exchange rate system is offi  cially and deliberately increased.
Activity
Prepare a presentation 
on why a government might want to have a lower exchange rate. Consider whether this is a sustainable economic policy.
Activity
Prepare a presentation 
on why a government 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   279 24/01/18   11:19 AM38	 foreiGn	exchanGe	rates
280» Prices and infl  ation — an increase in the price of goods and services caused 
by domestic infl  ation will tend to decrease the demand for exports. This will therefore cause the exchange rate to fall in value.
» Foreign direct investment (FDI) — globalisation and the expansion of 
multinational companies mean that investment in overseas production plants requires the use of foreign currencies. For example, Nissan’s car manufacturing plant in India requires the Japanese car maker to buy Indian rupees to pay for the materials, recruitment of labour and other production costs. Thus, inward FDI (such as the entry of an MNC) will boost the demand for a currency. By contrast, outward FDI (such as the departure of an MNC) will increase the supply of a currency.
▲ A Nissan car plant in Chennai, India
» Speculation — foreign exchange traders and investment companies move money around the world to take advantage of higher interest rates (see Chapter 27) and variations in exchange rates to earn a profi  t. As huge sums of money (known as ‘hot money’) are involved, speculation can cause exchange rate fl  uctuations, at least in the short run. Speculators might also lack confi  dence in certain economies and therefore withdraw their investments, thereby depreciating the currency (see the case study).
Case study: The collapse of Landsbanki and Kaupthing
The global fi  nancial crisis of 2008 saw the collapse of Iceland’s major banks, including 
Landsbanki (founded in 1886) and Kaupthing (founded in 1930). Investors across Europe feared the Icelandic banks would default on their debts, and this caused a selling frenzy which led to a rapid fall in the value of the krona (Iceland’s currency).
» Government intervention — all the above factors can affect the exchange 
rate under a freely fl  oating exchange rate system. In addition, government intervention in the foreign exchange market can affect the exchange rate. For example, if greater demand for American goods causes an appreciation of the dollar, the US Federal Reserve can sell its dollar reserves (thereby increasing supply of the dollar), leading to a fall in the value of its currency. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   280 24/01/18   11:19 AMConsequences of exchange rate fluctuations
281
Activity
The value of a currency will change if the demand for and/or supply of the currency 
changes. Explain with the use a demand and supply diagram the effects of the following events from the perspective of the USA.
a The USA buys more imports from Brazil.
b Millions of American tourists visit France.c There is an increase in American exports to Russia.d The Federal Reserve (the USA’s central bank) raises the rate of interest.e Speculators feel that the US dollar will rise in value against other major currencies.
Activity
The value of a currency will change if the demand for and/or supply of the currency 
changes. Explain with the use a demand and supply diagram the effects of the following 
Consequences of exchange rate 
fl  uctuations
Exchange rate fl  uctuations affect different stakeholders in different ways, 
depending on whether the consequences are seen from the perspective of customers or producers (both importers and exporters). 
The following is an analysis of a strong US dollar, due to either a currency 
appreciation or a currency revaluation. The opposite results would apply in the case of a currency depreciation or devaluation.
» Customers have greater purchasing power when the exchange rate increases. For example, if the exchange rate changes from $1.6 = £1 to $1.4 = £1, then Americans will require fewer dollars to buy British goods and services. Thus, American fi  rms and individuals are likely to buy more British goods and services.
» Exporters face more diffi  cult trading conditions when the exchange rate 
increases. This is because their goods and services will become more expensive for foreign customers. For example, if the exchange rate changes from $1.5 = €1 to $1.3 = €1 then customers from the European Union will need to spend more money to buy American goods and services. Therefore, demand for US exports is likely to drop.
» Importers potentially gain from a strong dollar because this makes it cheaper 
for US fi  rms to import raw materials, components and fi  nished goods from abroad. For example, if the US dollar appreciates from $1.5 = €1 to $1.3 = €1, American importers only need to spend $1300 on each €1000 order of goods and services from Europe, rather than $1500. While this is bad for US fi  rms trying to compete with American imports, it can help to reduce cost-push infl  ation (see Chapter 31).
Exchange rate fl  uctuations also have consequences for macroeconomic objectives. An increase in the exchange rate will have the following consequences for the balance of payments, employment, infl  ation and economic growth:
» Balance of payments — if a currency appreciation has a larger impact on exports than imports (that is, there is a fall in the value of net exports), then the balance of payments will worsen. This is because a strong currency will make it more diffi  cult for exporters to sell their goods and services in overseas markets.Study tip
The effects of foreign 
exchange rate fl  uctuations on a country’s export and import prices and spending on imports and exports depend on the value of the price elasticity of demand for its imports and exports. A currency depreciation or devaluation will have the desired effects of reducing demand for imports and increasing demand for exports only if the demand for import and exports is price elastic. 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   281 24/01/18   11:19 AM38	forei Gn	exchan Ge	rates
282» Employment — a fall in net exports and deteriorating profits will, in the long 
run, cause job losses in export-oriented businesses. This will therefore cause unemployment in the economy.
» Inflation — lower levels of spending in the economy, caused by higher unemployment, will tend to reduce the rate of inflation. In addition, if the country relies heavily on certain imports, such as oil or food supplies, then the higher exchange rate will help to reduce the general price level even further.
» Economic growth — in the long run, as a result of the higher exchange rate, economic growth is likely to fall due to the combination of lower export sales and higher unemployment.
Exam-style questions
Since China’s admission to the World Trade Organization in November 2001, the USA has complained frequently that the Chinese government has deliberately kept its exchange rate artificially low. The relatively low value of the yuan compared to the dollar has contributed to the problems in the US economy.
a
 Define exchange rate.  [2]
b Explain two advantages of a weak yuan for the Chinese economy.  [4]
Coping with a strong exchange rate
Firms can deal with a higher or strong exchange rate in a number of ways:
» Cutting export prices to maintain their price competitiveness against 
foreign rivals, although this means the domestic firms will have to accept lower profit margins.
» Seeking alternative overseas suppliers of cheaper raw materials and components.
» Improving productivity (efficiency) to keep average labour costs under control.
» Focusing on supplying more price inelastic and income inelastic products because customers will then become less sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations.
» Focusing on non-price factors that are important to overseas customers, such as brand awareness and social responsibility.
» Relocating production processes overseas, where costs of production are relatively low and where operations are less exposed to exchange rate fluctuations.
Exam-style questions
a Explain, with the aid of a numerical example, what is meant by an ‘appreciation’ in the value of a currency.
 [2]
b Analyse the likely effects of a country’s currency appreciation on its exports and imports.
 [6]Study tip
It is possible for some firms 
to gain from a stronger currency while others lose out. Review the main points in this chapter to make your own judgement on this.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   282 24/01/18   11:19 AMConsequences of exchange rate fluctuations
283Chapter review questions
1 What is an exchange rate?
2 What is the likely impact on a country’s exchange rate following an increase in the 
demand for its exports?
3 What is the likely impact on a country’s exchange rate following a decision of its 
government to cut interest rates?
4 How does a fi  xed exchange rate system differ from a fl  oating exchange rate system?5 What are the causes of exchange rate fl  uctuations?6 What are the consequences of exchange rate fl  uctuations for importers, exporters 
and customers?
7 How does a strong currency impact upon a country’s macroeconomic aims?
Revision checklist
✔ An exchange rate refers to the price of one currency measured in terms 
of other currencies.
✔ A foreign exchange market is the marketplace where different 
currencies can be bought and sold.
✔ In a ﬂ  oating exchange rate system, the currency is allowed to ﬂ  uctuate 
against other currencies according to market forces, without any 
government intervention.
✔ In a ﬁ  xed exchange rate system, the central bank or monetary authority 
buys and sells foreign currencies to ensure the value of its currency stays at the pegged value.
✔ The main advantage of a ﬁ  xed exchange rate system is that it reduces 
uncertainties for international trade.
✔ An appreciation of the currency occurs when there is an increase in its 
value in a ﬂ  oating exchange rate system. A depreciation of the currency occurs when there is a fall in its value in a ﬂ  oating exchange rate system.
✔ A revaluation of the currency occurs in a ﬁ  xed exchange rate system 
when the value of the currency is deliberately increased. A devaluation of the currency occurs in a ﬁ  xed exchange rate system when the value of the currency is deliberately reduced.
✔ Causes of exchange rate ﬂ  uctuations include: changes in the demand for 
imports and exports, price levels (inﬂ  ation), the degree of foreign direct investment, speculation in the foreign exchange market, and the degree of government intervention.
✔ Different stakeholders are affected by changes in the exchange rate 
in different ways. Exporters tend to lose out from a higher currency value. Customers and importers tend to gain, in the short term, as their purchasing power of foreign goods and services increases.
✔ Changes in the exchange rate have a direct impact on a country’s balance 
of payments, employment levels, inﬂ  ation rate and economic growth.
 An exchange rate refers to the price of one currency measured in terms 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   283 24/01/18   11:19 AM284
 39  Current account of balance of 
payments
The current account of the balance of 
payments
The balance of payments is a fi  nancial record of a country’s transactions with the rest 
of the world over a given time period, usually one year. This primarily includes the 
country’s trade in goods and services with other countries.
In theory, the balance of payments must always balance over time. This is because 
a country, like an individual, can only spend (on imports, for example) what it earns 
(from export earnings, for example).
The largest component of the balance of payments is the current account. This is a 
record of all exports and imports of goods and services between a country and the rest 
of the world, plus net income transfers from abroad. The current account is structured 
in four parts: trade in goods, trade in services, primary income and secondary income.
Trade in goods 
This part of the current account is a record of the exports and imports of physical 
goods, hence it is also known as the visible balance. It is the trade in raw 
materials, semi-manufactured products and manufactured goods. Visible exports are goods which are sold to foreign customers, with money fl  owing into the domestic economy. For example, the export of Toyota cars results in an inward fl  ow of money to Japan’s visible balance. Visible imports are goods bought by domestic customers from foreign sellers, such as Japanese residents buying German cars. This results in money fl  owing out of the Japanese economy.
▲ Toyota cars are an example of visible exports
Deﬁ  nitions
The balance of payments 
is a fi  nancial record of a country’s transactions with the rest of the world for a given time period, usually one year.The current account is the largest component of the balance of payments. It records all exports and imports of goods and services between a country and its trading partners, plus net income transfers from abroad.
Study tip
The full balance of 
payments is made up of three accounts: the current account, the capital account and the fi  nancial account. However, the Cambridge International syllabus only requires students to know about the current account.By the end of this chapter, students should be able to:
★ understand the structure of the current account of the balance of 
payments
★ understand the causes of current account deﬁ  cit and surplus
★ explain the consequences of current account deﬁ  cit and surplus
★ discuss the policies to achieve balance of payments stability.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   284 24/01/18   11:19 AMThe current account of the balance of payments
285Trade in services 
This is a record of the export and import of services (intangible products). 
Examples include the trade in services such as banking, insurance, consultancy, shipping and tourism. It is sometimes called the invisible balance. For example, tourism expenditure of Americans in France would represent export earnings (or an invisible export) for the French economy. By contrast, French customers who 
fl  y on American Airlines represent an invisible import for France.
Primary income 
Also known as investment income, this is a record of a country’s net income 
earned from investments abroad. Examples are:
» profi  ts earned by subsidiary companies based in overseas countries
» interest received from loans and deposits in overseas banks
» dividends earned from fi  nancial investments in overseas companies
» foreign direct investments of individuals or businesses in overseas business 
ventures
» money sent home by people working abroad.
Secondary income 
The fi  nal section of the current account records net income transfers, per time period. It shows income transfers between residents and non-residents. Transfers arise from fi  nancial gifts between residents of different countries, such as:
» donations to charities abroad
» foreign aid
» subsidies or grants paid to companies based in overseas locations
» payments of pensions to retired people now based in overseas countries
» scholarships paid to students based in overseas universities.
Therefore, the current account is calculated as follows:
Current account = balance of trade + primary income + secondary income
Table 39.1 shows the current account balance of the countries with the highest and lowest balances in 2016.  
Table 39.1 The current account balance: selected countries, 2016
Top ﬁ  ve countries Bottom ﬁ  ve countries
Rank Country $bn Rank Country $bn
1 China 196.4 1 USA −481.2
2 Japan 191.0 2 UK −114.5
3 South Korea 98.68 3 Canada −51.1
4 Switzerland 78.93 4 Australia −33.2
5 Taiwan 75.29 5 Turkey −32.6
Source: CIA, World Factbook
Activity 
Investigate the main exports and imports for your country, or a country of your choice. 
Does your chosen country currently have a positive or negative trade balance?
Activity 
Investigate the main exports and imports for your country, or a country of your choice. 
Does your chosen country currently have a positive or negative trade balance?
Study tip
The balance of trade is 
the sum of the trade in goods plus the trade in services: that is, visible balance + invisible balance. The balance of trade is the largest section of the current account.
Study tip
The easiest way to 
distinguish between invisible exports and invisible imports is to consider fl  ows of money (where the money comes from or goes to) rather than fl  ows of services.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   285 24/01/18   11:19 AM39	 current	account	of	balance	of	payments
286
Activity
Copy the following table and classify each transaction by using a tick in the correct 
column, from the perspective of the UK economy.
Transaction Visible Invisible
Export Import Export Import
a A German company purchases UK-produced 
chemical products
b American tourists fl  y to the UK on British Airways
c UK supermarkets purchase French wine and cheese
d The UK government maintains foreign embassies overseas
e German tourists buy theatre tickets to see Les Misérables in London
f The UK government pays interest on its borrowing (debts)
g A British fi  rm buys a fl  eet of lorries (trucks) from Japan
h Global sales of Harry Potter books by British author J.K. Rowling
Activity
Copy the following table and classify each transaction by using a tick in the correct 
column, from the perspective of the UK economy.
Exam-style question
Study the data below and answer the questions that follow.
Trade balance for Country B ($bn), 2017
Exports 85
Goods 57
Services 28
Imports  
Goods 88
Services 15
Visible balance
Invisible balance
Trade balance
a Defi  ne the term ‘invisible balance’. [2]
b Calculate the missing fi  gures in the data above. [4]
Current account defi  cits and surpluses
A country is said to have a current account defi  cit if its import expenditure is 
greater than its export earnings. Hence, the current account has a negative balance. By contrast a current account surplus exists if the country exports more than it imports. This means the country will have a positive balance on its current account.
286
Deﬁ  nitions
A current account deﬁ  cit 
occurs when a country spends more money than it earns, i.e. imports exceed exports.A current account surplus exists if a country exports more than it imports.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   286 24/01/18   11:19 AMCurrent account deficits and surpluses
287Causes of current account deficits
A deficit on the current account can occur due to a combination of two factors:
» Lower demand for exports — this could be caused by a decline in 
manufacturing competitiveness, perhaps due to higher labour costs in the domestic economy. Another factor is declining incomes in foreign markets, perhaps due to an economic recession. This means households and firms have less money available to spend on another country’s exports. A third cause of lower demand for exports is a higher exchange rate (see Chapter 38). This makes exports more expensive for foreign buyers, so reduces the volume and value of exports.
» Higher demand for imports — domestic buyers will tend to buy more imports if they are cheaper or of better quality. For example, a higher exchange rate means the domestic currency can buy more foreign currency, so this makes it cheaper to buy imports. Alternatively, domestic inflation means that imports are relatively cheaper, so more domestic residents and firms will tend to buy foreign goods and services.
Exam-style questions
Examine Figure 39.1, which shows the balance of trade for Sri Lanka, and answer the questions that follow.
2012 2014 2016–1200–1000–800–600–400–200US $m
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 39.1 The balance of trade for Sri Lanka, 2012–16
a Define balance of trade.  [2]
b Explain two possible causes of the trend in Sri Lanka’s balance of trade.  [4]
Consequences of current account deficits
Like an individual, a country cannot spend more (on imported goods, services 
and capital) than it earns (from the export of goods, services and capital). The severity of the consequences of a deficit depends on its size and duration. Nevertheless, a current account deficit is generally considered to be unfavourable for the economy for several reasons:
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   287 24/01/18   11:19 AM39	current 	account 	of	balance 	of	payments
288» Reduced demand — a trade deficit means the economy is spending more 
money on imports than it is receiving from the export of goods and services. This can cause demand in the economy to fall, thus triggering a recession (see Chapter 29). The USA’s trade deficit with China has been blamed for much of the country’s recent economic problems.
» Unemployment — as labour has a derived demand (see Chapter 18), a fall in overall demand is likely to cause cyclical unemployment in the economy (see Chapter 30). Workers may also have to take a pay cut in order to correct the deficit. For example, the UK has experienced a decline in manufacturing jobs as there has been a fall in the demand for British exports of coal, steel, textiles and motor vehicles.
» Lower standards of living — if the current account deficit is caused by a negative balance on net incomes (primary and secondary income flows), this means capital outflows exceed capital inflows for the country. An economy with less income is likely to suffer from lower standards of living. In addition, to cut the current account deficit, households and firms may need to reduce their spending.
» Increased borrowing — just as an individual cannot spend more than he or she earns in the long run, countries need to borrow money or attract foreign investment in order to rectify their current account deficits. In addition, there is an opportunity cost of debt repayment as the government cannot use this money to stimulate economic growth.
» Lower exchange rate — a fall in demand for exports and/or a rise in the demand for imports (causing the current account deficit) reduces the exchange rate. While a lower exchange rate can mean exports become more price competitive, it also means that essential imports (such as oil and foodstuffs) will become more expensive. This can lead to imported inflation (see Chapter 31). The consequences of fluctuating exchange rates are covered in more detail in Chapter 38.
In general, large and persistent current account deficits are a sign that the country is internationally uncompetitive. These deficits tend to have a negative impact on economic growth and standards of living.
Exam-style questions
Despite China being the USA’s largest customer, America’s trade deficit with China is at its highest ever level (see Table 39.2). The imports include consumer electronics, clothing, toys, sports equipment, furniture, footwear and machinery (such as power generators).
Table 39.2 Trade between the USA and China, 2010 and 2016
2016 ($m) 2010 ($m)
US exports to China 115,602.1 91,911.1
US imports from China 426,618.1 364,952.6
Source: adapted from US Census
a Calculate the trade balance for the USA with China in 2010 and 2016.  [2]
b Explain how it is possible that ‘America’s trade deficit with China is at its highest ever level’ even though the USA has reported record export sales to China.
 [4]Study tip
A deficit on the current 
account that is manageable is not necessarily a bad thing. For example, the deficit might be the result of strong economic growth, with residents purchasing more foreign goods and services. This allows the country’s residents to enjoy a higher standard of living as they are able to benefit from access to a range of good-quality imports.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   288 24/01/18   11:19 AMCurrent account deficits and surpluses
289Causes of current account surpluses
A surplus on the current account can occur due to a combination of two factors:
» Higher demand for exports — this can be caused by an improvement in 
manufacturing competitiveness, perhaps due to higher labour productivity in the domestic economy. Another factor is higher incomes in overseas markets, meaning foreign households and firms have more money to spend on the country’s exports. A third cause of higher demand for exports is a lower exchange rate (see Chapter 38). This makes exports less expensive for foreign buyers, so increases the demand for exports.
» Reduced demand for imports — domestic buyers will tend to buy fewer imports if they are more expensive or of lower quality than those provided by domestic firms. For example, a lower exchange rate means the domestic currency can buy less foreign currency, so this makes it more expensive to buy imports. Another reason is that inflation in overseas countries causes imports to be more expensive, so individuals and firms buy more home-produced goods and services.
Consequences of current account surpluses
The consequences of a country having a persistent current account surplus include the following:
» Employment — a sustained current account surplus can be desirable as higher export sales help to create jobs. However, a negative consequence of this is that job losses are created in other countries. For example, the USA has blamed China for sustaining a huge current account surplus, causing large-scale unemployment in America.
» Standards of living — a favourable current account balance means the country receives a higher income because domestic firms have a competitive advantage in the products they export. This can lead to a higher standard of living (see Chapter 32).
▲ Oil-exporting countries such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates have 
consistently enjoyed current account surpluses, thus boosting their GDP and standards of living
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   289 24/01/18   11:19 AM39	current 	account 	of	balance 	of	payments
290» Inflationary pressures — higher demand for exports can lead to demand-pull 
inflation (see Chapter 31). Therefore, the current account surplus can diminish the international competitiveness of the country over time as the price of exports rises due to inflation.
» Higher exchange rate — the higher demand for exports can cause the currency to appreciate in value (see Chapter 38). Subsequently, foreign buyers will find 
it more expensive to import goods into their countries.
Exam-style questions
Examine Figure 39.2, which shows the current account balance for Kuwait, and 
answer the questions that follow.
2001 2004 2007 2010 2013 2016050
40302010Kuwaiti dinar (millions)
Source: Trading Economics
▲ Figure 39.2 Current account balance for Kuwait, 2000–16
a Define current account surplus.  [2]
b Explain two consequences of Kuwait’s continual current account surplus 
during the twenty-first century.  [4]
Policies to achieve balance of payments 
stability
There are four main policies that can be used to improve a country’s current 
account balance — fiscal and monetary policies (which tackle demand-side issues), supply-side policies and trade protection measures. These macroeconomic policies are covered in more detail in Chapters 26–28 and 37 respectively.
» Fiscal policy — these measures use a combination of higher taxes and reduced government spending to decrease the amount of money available to spend on imports. In theory, this helps to reduce the current account deficit.
» Monetary policy — higher interest rates make new and existing loans more expensive for households and firms. This reduces their demand for imports. Alternatively, the central monetary authority of a country (see Chapter 16) might decide to devalue the exchange rate to improve the nation’s competitiveness. Study tip
A surplus on the current 
account is not necessarily a good thing. For example, former communist nation Romania achieved a trade surplus by using protectionist policies (see Chapter 37). This limited access to foreign goods and services, thus causing living standards to be lower.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   290 24/01/18   11:19 AMPolicies to achieve balance of payments stability
291This also has the effect of reducing the price of exports and making imports 
more expensive.
» Supply-side policies — these policies strive to raise the productive capacity of the economy. Examples are:– investment in education and healthcare services to improve the economy’s 
human capital, productivity and international competitiveness
– investment in infrastructure to support businesses and industries, especially 
those engaged in export markets
– measures to encourage export-driven business start-ups and industries, such 
as government subsidies and tax incentives.
» Protectionist measures — these measures reduce the competiveness of imports, thereby making domestic consumption more attractive. For example, tariffs (import taxes) raise the price of imports, while quotas (see Chapter 37) limit the amount of imports available.
Exam-style questions
‘A current account defi  cit on the balance of payments is undesirable during a recession but is not really a problem during periods of economic growth.’
a Defi  ne the term current account deﬁ  cit. [2]
b Explain the validity of the above statement. [4]
Exam-style questions
1 What is not part of the current account? [1]
A Debt (borrowing)B Primary incomeC Trade in goodsD Trade in services
2 Which option is secondary income? [1]
A Earnings from foreign direct investmentsB Overseas donations for domestic charitiesC Profi  ts earned by multinational companies based in foreign countriesD Interest earned from deposits held in overseas banks
Chapter review questions
1 What is the balance of payments?
2 What is the difference between the visible trade balance and the invisible trade 
balance?
3 What is the balance of trade?4 How does primary income differ from secondary income?5 How does a current account defi  cit differ from a current account surplus?6 What are the two main causes of a current account defi  cit?7 How might a government deal with a current account defi  cit?8 Why might a current account surplus be detrimental to the country?
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   291 24/01/18   11:19 AM39	 current	account	of	balance	of	payments
292Revision checklist
✔ The balance of payments is a ﬁ  nancial record of a country’s transactions 
with the rest of the world, per time period. Over time, the balance of 
payments must balance. 
✔ The current account is the largest component of the balance of 
payments. 
✔ The current account is structured in four parts: trade in goods, trade in 
services, primary income and secondary income.
✔ The trade in goods records the balance of exports and imports of physical 
goods.
✔ The trade in services is a record of the exports and imports of services 
(intangible products).
✔ The balance of trade is the sum of the trade in goods plus the trade in 
services — that is, visible balance + invisible balance.
✔ Primary income (also known as investment income) is a record of a 
country’s net income earned from investments abroad.
✔ Secondary income is the ﬁ  nal section of the current account, which 
records net income transfers between residents and non-residents of a country.
✔ The two key causes of current account deﬁ  cits are lower demand for 
exports and higher demand for imports.
✔ Consequences of current account deﬁ  cits include: reduced demand in the 
economy, unemployment, lower standards of living, increased borrowing and a lower exchange rate.
✔ The two key causes of current account surpluses are higher demand for 
exports and lower demand for imports.
✔ Consequences of current account surpluses include: more employment, 
improved standards of living, inﬂ  ationary pressures and a higher exchange rate.
✔ There are four main macroeconomic policies that can be used to improve 
the current account: ﬁ  scal policy, monetary policy, supply-side policies and trade protection measures.
 The balance of payments is a ﬁ  nancial record of a country’s transactions 
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   292 24/01/18   11:19 AM293Additional exam-style questions
Additional exam-style questions
1 Read the source material carefully before answering Question 1.
 Brazil experienced economic growth between 2003 and 2014, which lifted 29 
million people out of poverty, and it is now the eighth largest economy in the world. Brazil entered a recession in 2015 which continued into 2016 when it experienced negative economic growth of –3.8% and –3.6% respectively. Causes of the recession included a fall in the global price of commodities and a political crisis that reduced confidence in the Brazilian economy for consumers, firms and foreign investors.
 Despite poverty reduction in recent years, Brazil remains one of the most unequal societies in the world and has very high rates of relative poverty. The richest 1% of the population earn 47% of the income and the poorest 10% earn only 12% of the total income.
 In August 2016, Brazil hosted the Olympic Games, which attracted many visitors to the country. The Games cost the Brazilian government a significant amount of money, estimated to be US$13.1 billion, yet the government was finding it difficult to pay public sector workers including teachers, doctors and nurses.
 Brazil is the world’s largest producer of coffee. It produces over 40% of the world’s coffee and over 5 million people are employed in the coffee industry. In July 2017, Brazil reported it lowest quantity of coffee exports for ten years. Possible reasons for low exports were damaged beans due to the coffee bean borer beetle infestation and low coffee prices, making farmers reluctant to sell their goods. Brazil is also the largest producer of oranges, sugarcane and tobacco. It also has natural resources of iron ore, zinc, gold and tin.
 Table 1
Age structure of Brazil’s population 2016 (CIA Fact Book)
0–14 years   22.33%
15–24 years 16.36%
25–54 years 43.86%
55–64 years 9.12% 
65 years and over 8.33%
  The fertility rate is 1.75 children per woman (July 2017 estimate). It has decreasing birth rates and Brazil’s age structure suggests that from 2025 it will have an ageing population and a higher dependency ratio. A public pension scheme for all has reduced poverty amongst the elderly in Brazil.  
 
 Answer all parts of Question 1. Refer to source material in your answers.a
 Using Table 1, calculate the percentage of the population that is  dependent on the working population (the dependency ratio).
 [1]
b Identify two possible reasons why 29 million people were lifted out  of poverty in Brazil between 2003 and 2014.
 [2]
C Explain what is meant by relative poverty.  [2]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   293 24/01/18   11:19 AM294additional	exam -style	 Questions
d Analyse the impact of the Olympic Games on the Brazilian economy.  [4]
e Explain two reasons why Brazil has an unequal distribution of income.  [4]
f Analyse possible reasons why coffee exports were low in July 2017.  [5]
g Discuss whether or not an ageing population will be bad for Brazil’s 
economy.  [6]
h Discuss whether Brazil should become less specialised as an economy  to promote economic growth.
 [6]
2 Read the source material carefully before answering Question 2.
 Hong Kong is a Special Administrative Region of China. It functions as a free market economy and is able to make its own decisions on trade and economic policies under the ‘one country, two systems’ formula of China. In 2017, economic growth was 3.6%, unemployment 3% and inflation 1.5%. It had a budget surplus of US$11.82 billion (HK$92.4 billion) and has fiscal reserves of US$119.7 billion (HK$935.7 billion). The standard rate of income and corporation tax is 15%.
 In November 2017, the Hong Kong SAR government issued a report which revealed that in 2016 20% of the population (1.35 million people out of 7.35 million people) lived below the official poverty line. Poverty in Hong Kong is defined as earning less than half the median income per household size.
 Table 1
Number of people in household Half median income per month (US$)
1 512 (HK$4000)
2 1151 (HK$9000)
3 1918 (HK$15000)
  The Hong Kong dollar is pegged to the US dollar and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (which acts as the central bank) maintains the Hong Kong dollar peg on a daily basis. The stability of Hong Kong’s currency has contributed to its economic success.
 
 The hourly minimum wage is HK$34.50 (US$4.43). The rate is reviewed every 2 years. Some argue that Hong Kong’s minimum wage is too low for workers to maintain a decent standard of living.
 Table 2
Country Average minimum hourly wage (US$)
Hong Kong SAR  4.43 (HKD 34.50) 
Australia 14.01 (AUD 18.29)
France 11.55 (Euros 9.76)
USA  7.25 
UK  9.45 (GBP 7.05)
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   294 24/01/18   11:19 AM295Additional exam-style questions
  Hong Kong employs over 350,000 foreign domestic workers, who work 
in people’s homes looking after children and the elderly, cooking and cleaning. These workers live with their employers and get paid a wage agreed by the government. The majority of these workers come from the Philippines and Indonesia, with a smaller number from Thailand and Sri Lanka. Every month they send a proportion of their income back to their home countries.
 Table 3 (source UNDP data and CIA Fact Book)
Country HDI Life expectancy 
(years)Mean years of 
schooling(US$) Real GDP per capita (PPP)
Philippines 0.682 68.3
 9.3 7,700
Indonesia 0.689 69.1  7.9 11,700
Thailand 0.740 74.6  7.9 16,900
Sri Lanka 0.766 75.0 10.9 12,300
Hong Kong 0.917 84.2 11.6 58,300
  Answer all parts of Question 2. Refer to the source material in your answers.
a With reference to Table 1, calculate the exchange rate of the Hong Kong dollar to the US dollar.
 [1]
b Identify two functions of a central bank.  [2]
c With reference to Table 2, identify two possible reasons why minimum wages are lower in Hong Kong than in France, Australia, USA and  the UK.
 [2]
d Analyse the advantages of using HDI as a measure of living standards  as compared to real GDP.
 [4]
e Explain two reasons why people move to Hong Kong from the  Philippines or Indonesia to work as foreign domestic workers.
 [4]
f Analyse the advantages and disadvantages of a fixed exchange rate  system for the Hong Kong economy. [5]
g
 Discuss whether or not a minimum wage always causes unemployment  in an economy. 
 [6]
h Discuss the policies that can be used to alleviate poverty and  redistribute income in Hong Kong.
 [6]
3 The price of butter in the UK soared by as much as 53% during 2017 due to dairy shortages and increased demand from customers. Higher demand was fuelled by popular cooking shows on television and reports that butter is not a ‘bad’ food. Shortages in supply mean there is not enough milk, cream and butter to meet the demand of customers. As a result, manufacturers of butter-heavy food products are forced to raise their prices.a
 Define the term demand.  [2]
b Explain two factors that affect the supply of butter.  [4]
c Analyse, using an appropriate diagram, the effect of a subsidy on the output and price of butter.
 [6]
d Discuss whether it is possible to apply the concepts of opportunity cost and social benefits to the trade in butter.
 [8]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   295 24/01/18   11:19 AM296additional	exam -style	 Questions
4 In 2018, China introduced an import ban on plastic waste, in an attempt to 
reduce the millions of tons of plastic waste it receives each year. China is the world’s largest importer of global plastic scrap, and purchases these from the USA, Hong Kong, Europe, Japan, and Southeast Asia. Plastic waste and the plastic pollution problem are external costs of economic activity, particularly harming the oceans and marine life.a
 Define the term external costs.  [2]
b Explain why plastic waste is a consequence of market failure.  [4]
c Analyse the relationship between a country’s level of economic activity  and its standard of living.
 [6]
d Discuss whether or not governments should use taxes to deal with the problem of market failure.
 [8]
5 In 2017, economic growth in the USA grew faster than initially expected. The 3.3% increase in the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) led to an increase in interest rates. Consumer confidence soared to a 17-year high, with the government announcing that the corporate tax rate would be cut from 35% to 20%. Most economists expect the tax changes would help the economy to grow by between 2% to 2.5% per year in the long run.a
 Define the term economic growth.  [2]
b Explain two reasons why the USA may have experienced higher than expected economic growth.
 [4]
c Analyse how higher than expected rate of economic growth may  increase a country’s inflation rates.
 [6]
d Discuss whether or not a government should use fiscal policy to achieve economic growth.  
 [8]
6 The unemployment rate in Spain averaged 16.56% between 1976 and 2017. The highest rate was 26.94% in 2013, following the consequences of the global financial crisis in 2008. However, critics were concerned with the quality of the jobs created, with around one in three new jobs being on a temporary contract basis. Indeed, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommended that Spain address these perilous practices, especially as they are a major source of poverty. Nevertheless, Spain was able to increase it real GDP by 3.2%. Spain’s lowest unemployment rate on record was 4.41%, back in 1976.a
 Define the term unemployment.  [2]
b Explain why governments aim to reduce the level of unemployment in  the economy. 
 [4]
c Analyse how fiscal policy measures can be used to increase the level of  real GDP.
 [6]
d Discuss whether or not a country should use supply-side policies to  achieve economic growth.
 [8]
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Sec-06.indd   296 24/01/18   11:19 AM297Glossary
Absolute poverty exists when there is extreme outright 
poverty, i.e. income equal to or less than $1.25 per day.
Appreciation of a currency occurs when there is an increase 
in its value relative to another currency operating in a 
floating exchange rate system.
Average fixed cost refers to a firm’s fixed cost per unit of 
output.
Average total cost is the cost per unit of output, i.e. the 
total cost of making one product.
Average variable cost refers to the variable cost per unit 
of output.
Balance of payments is a financial record of a country’s 
transactions with the rest of the world for a given time period, usually one year.
Barriers to entry are the obstacles that prevent firms 
from entering a market. Examples are the existence of intellectual property rights, large advertising budgets of existing firms and legal constraints to prevent wasteful competition.
Bartering is the act of swapping items in exchange for other 
items through a process of bargaining and negotiation, due to the absence of money in the economy.
Base year refers to the starting year when calculating a price 
index.
Basic economic problem is concerned with how best to 
allocate scarce resources in order to satisfy people’s unlimited needs and wants.
Birth rate measures the number of live births per thousand of 
the population in a year.
Borrowing occurs when an individual, firm or the government 
takes out a loan, paying it back to the financial lender over a period of time, with interest payments.
Business cycle (or trade cycle) describes the fluctuations in 
the economic activity of a country over time, creating a long-term trend of economic growth in the economy.
Capital expenditure is money spent by on fixed assets (items 
owned by an individual or firm which last more than 12 months), such as computers, cars, furniture, buildings and equipment.
Capital-intensive industries are those in which the use and 
cost of capital is more prominent than that of any other factor of production, e.g. car manufacturing.
Central bank of a country is the monetary authority that 
oversees and manages the economy’s money supply and banking system.
Claimant count measures the number of people who are out 
of work and claiming unemployment benefits.
Collective bargaining is the process of trade union 
representatives negotiating on behalf of their worker members with employer representatives for better pay and conditions.
Commercial bank is a retail bank that provides financial 
services to its customers, e.g. savings, bank loans and mortgages.Complements are products that are jointly demanded, e.g. 
tennis balls and tennis racquets.
Conglomerate merger occurs when two or more firms from 
unrelated areas of business integrate to create a new firm.
Consumer Price Index (CPI) is a weighted index of consumer 
prices in the economy over time. It is used to measure the cost of living for an average household.
Consumption is the value of all private household 
consumption within a country.
Contraction in demand means a fall in the quantity 
demanded for a product following an increase in its price.
Contraction in supply means a fall in the quantity supplied 
of a product following a fall in its price.
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) refers to the ethical 
approach taken by firms towards their stakeholders (such as employees and customers) and the environment (such as adopting green technologies).
Cost-push inflation is a cause of inflation, triggered by 
higher costs of production, thus forcing up prices.
Costs of production refer to a firm’s expenditure in the 
process of producing goods and/or providing services.
Current account is the largest component of the balance of 
payments. It records all exports and imports of goods and services between a country and its trading partners, plus net income transfers from abroad.
Current account deficit occurs when a country spends more 
money than it earns, i.e. imports exceed exports.Current account deficit occurs when a country spends more 
money than it earns, i.e. imports exceed exports.
Current account surplus exists if a country exports more 
than it imports.
Current expenditure is money spent on goods and services 
consumed within the current year. Unlike capital expenditure, it is often recurrent, such as the spending on food, clothing, entertainment and haircuts.
Cyclical unemployment is unemployment caused by a lack 
of demand in the economy, which causes a fall in national income. It is a severe type of unemployment as it can affect every industry in the economy.
Death rate measures the number of deaths per thousand of 
the population in a year.
Deflation is the sustained fall in the general price level in an 
economy over time, i.e. the inflation rate is negative.
Demand refers to the willingness and the ability of customers 
to pay a given price to buy a good or service. The higher the price of a product, the lower its demand tends to be.
Demand for labour is the number of workers that firms are 
willing and able to hire at a given wage rate.
Demand-pull inflation is a cause of inflation, triggered by 
higher levels of demand in the economy, thus driving up the general price level.
Demerger occurs when two previously merged firms decide to 
break up and become two separate firms. 
Demerit goods are goods or services which when consumed 
cause negative spillover effects in an economy.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   297 12/02/18   9:57 AM298Demographics is the study of population distribution and 
trends.
Dependency ratio is a comparison of the number of people 
who are not in the labour force with the number of people 
in active paid employment.
Depreciation of a currency occurs when there is a fall in its 
value relative to another currency operating in a floating exchange rate system.
Derived demand means that labour (or any other factor of 
production) is not demanded for itself but for the goods and services it is used to produce.
Devaluation occurs when the price of a currency operating in 
a fixed exchange rate system is officially and deliberately lowered.
Diseconomies of scale occur when average costs of 
production start to increase as the size of a firm increases.
Disposable income is the amount of income a person has 
available to spend on goods and services after compulsory deductions such as income tax.
Division of labour refers to workers being expert in a 
particular production process.
Economic agents are households (private individuals in 
society), firms that operate in the private sector of an economy and the government (the public sector of an economy).
Economic development is an intangible concept that 
considers both quantitative and qualitative variables in raising the standard of living within a country.
Economic goods are those which are limited in supply.Economic growth is the annual increase in the level of 
national output, i.e. the annual percentage change in gross domestic product.
Economies of scale are the cost-saving benefits of large-
scale operations, which reduce average costs of production.
Embargo is a ban on trade with a certain country.Employment refers to the use of factors of production in the 
economy, such as labour.
Equilibrium price is the price at which the demand curve for 
a product intersects the supply curve for the product. The market is therefore cleared of any excess demand or supply.
Excess demand refers to a situation where the market price 
is below the equilibrium price, thus creating a shortage in the market.
Excess supply refers to a situation where the market price is 
above the equilibrium price, thus creating a surplus in the market.
Exchange rate refers to the price of one currency measured in 
terms of other currencies.
Extension in demand means an increase in the quantity 
demanded for a product following a fall in its price.
Extension in supply means an increase in the quantity 
supplied of a product following an increase in its price.
External benefits are the positive side-effects of production 
or consumption experienced by third parties for which no money is paid by the beneficiary.
External costs are the negative side-effects of production 
or consumption incurred by third parties for which no compensation is paid.External economies of scale are economies of scale that 
arise from factors outside of the firm, e.g. the location of the firm, proximity to transport, and the availability of skilled workers.
Factors of production refer to the resources required to 
produce a good or service, namely land, labour, capital and enterprise.
Female participation rate measures the proportion of 
women who are active in the labour force. As an economy grows and develops, there tends to be a higher female participation rate.
Fertility rate measures the average number of births per 
woman. It is used as a component to measure population growth.
Fiscal policy is the use of taxes and government spending to 
affect macroeconomic objectives such as economic growth and employment.
Fixed costs are costs that a firm has to pay irrespective of 
how much it produces or sells.
Fixed exchange rate system exists when the central bank (or 
monetary authority) buys and sells foreign currencies to ensure the value of its currency stays at the pegged value.
Floating exchange rate system means that the currency ismonetary authority) buys and sells foreign currencies to ensure the value of its currency stays at the pegged value.
Floating exchange rate system means that the currency is 
allowed to fluctuate against other currencies according to market forces, without any government intervention.
Foreign exchange market is the marketplace where different 
currencies can be bought and sold.
Formal sector employment refers to officially recorded 
employment, where workers pay income taxes and contribute to the country’s official GDP.
Franchise involves a person or business buying a licence 
to trade using another firm’s name, logos, brands and trademarks.
Free goods are goods which are unlimited in supply, such as 
air and seawater. Hence, there is no opportunity cost in terms of their output.
Free trade means that international trade takes place without 
protectionist measures (barriers to international trade).
Frictional unemployment is transitional unemployment 
which occurs when people change jobs or are in-between jobs.
Full employment means that everyone in a country who is 
willing and able to work has a job.
GDP per head measures the average value of annual GDP per 
capita (person).
Geographical mobility refers to the extent to which labour 
is willing and able to move to different locations for employment purposes.
Globalisation is the process by which the world’s economies 
become increasingly interdependent and interconnected.
Goods are physical items such as tables, cars, toothpaste and 
pencils.
Government budget refers to its financial plans in terms of 
planned revenues (mainly tax revenues) and expenditure (such as healthcare, education and welfare payments).
Gross domestic product measures the monetary value of 
goods and services produced within a country for a given period of time, usually one year.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   298 12/02/18   9:57 AM299Horizontal merger occurs when two or more firms in the 
same economic sector of industry integrate.
Human Development Index is the United Nations’ composite 
indicator of living standards in a country, comprising three 
dimensions of human development: education, healthcare and income.
Hyperinflation refers to very high rates of inflation that are 
out of control, causing average prices in the economy to rise very rapidly.
Imported inflation is a cause of inflation triggered by higher 
import prices, forcing up costs of production and thus causing domestic inflation.
Import quota is a quantitative limit on the sale of a foreign 
good.
Industrial action refers to measures taken by trade union 
members as a result of major disagreements or disputes with their employers, e.g. strike action.
Inflation is the sustained rise in the general level of prices of 
goods and services over time, as measured by a consumer price index.
Innovation is the commercialisation of new ideas and 
products. It is a vital source of productivity.
Interdependence means that the three sectors of industry 
depend on each other, and cannot operate independently to produce goods and services.
Internal economies of scale are economies of scale that 
arise from the internal organisation of the business, e.g. financial, bulk-buying and technical economies of scale.
International specialisation occurs when countries 
concentrate on the production of certain goods or services due to cost advantages, perhaps due to their abundance of resources.
International trade refers to the exchange of goods and 
services beyond national borders.
Investment expenditure is the sum of capital spending by 
all businesses within a country.
Labour force survey uses the ILO’s standardised household-
based survey to collect work-related statistics.
Labour-intensive industries are those in which the cost of 
labour is proportionately higher than the cost of other factors of production, e.g. accountancy, real estate services and tourism.
Macroeconomics is the study of economic behaviour and 
decision making in the whole economy, rather than individual markets.
Market demand is the sum of all individual demand for a 
particular product.
Market disequilibrium exists if the price for a product is too 
high (resulting in excess supply, or a surplus) or too low (resulting in excess demand, or a shortage).
Market equilibrium exists when the demand for a product 
matches the supply, so there is no excess demand (shortage) or excess supply (surplus).
Market failure occurs when the market forces of demand and 
supply are unsuccessful in allocating resources efficiently and cause external costs or external benefits.
Market structure refers to the key characteristics of a 
particular market (or industry), such as the number and size of firms in the market, the degree and intensity of price and non-price competition, and the nature of barriers to entry.
Market system refers to the method of allocating scarce 
resources through the market forces of demand and supply.
Maximum price occurs when the government sets a price 
below the market equilibrium price in order to encourage consumption.
Merger occurs when two or more firms join together to form 
just one firm.
Merit goods are goods or services which when consumed 
create positive spillover effects in an economy.
Microeconomics is the study of particular markets and 
sections of the economy, rather than the economy as a whole.
Minimum price occurs when the government sets a price 
above the market equilibrium price in order to encourage output of a certain good or service.
Monetary policy refers to the use of interest rates, exchange 
rates and the money supply to control macroeconomic objectives and to affect the level of economic activity.
Money is any commodity that can be used as a medium of 
exchange for the purchase of goods and services, e.g. banknotes and coins.
Money supply refers to the amount of money in the economyMoney is any commodity that can be used as a medium of 
exchange for the purchase of goods and services, e.g. banknotes and coins.
Money supply refers to the amount of money in the economy 
at a particular point in time, e.g. coins, banknotes, bank deposits and central bank reserves.
Monopoly is a market structure where there is only one 
supplier of a good or service, with the power to affect market supply and prices.
Multinational corporation is an organisation that operates 
in two or more countries.
Nationalisation is the purchase of private sector assets by 
the government.
National minimum wage is the lowest legal amount any firm 
can pay its workers and is set by the government.
Needs are goods and services that are essential for survival.Net exports refers to the monetary value of the difference 
between a nation’s export earnings and its import expenditure.
Net migration rate measures the difference between 
immigration and emigration rates for a country, thus indicating the physical movement of people into and out of a country.
Nominal gross domestic product (nominal GDP) measures 
the monetary value of goods and services produced within a country during a given period of time, usually one year.
Occupational mobility refers to the extent to which labour 
is able to move between jobs. Retraining and upskilling help workers to improve occupational mobility.
Opportunity cost is the cost of the next best opportunity 
forgone when making a decision.
Optimum population exists when the output of goods and 
services per head of the population is maximised.
Overspecialisation occurs when an individual, firm, region or 
country concentrates too much on producing a very limited number of goods and services. This exposes the economic agent to a far higher degree of risk.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   299 12/02/18   9:57 AM300Population refers to the total number of inhabitants of a 
particular country.
Population distribution refers to the composition and 
structure of a country’s population.
Population growth refers to the rate of change in the size of 
a country’s population.
Population pyramids are a graphical representation of the 
age and gender distribution of a country’s population.
Poverty is a condition that exists when people lack adequate 
income and wealth to sustain a basic standard of living.
PPC diagram is a graphical representation of the maximum 
combination of the amounts of goods and services that can 
be produced in an economy, per period of time.
Price discrimination occurs when firms charge different 
customers different prices for essentially the same product due to differences in PED.
Price elastic demand describes demand for a product that is 
responsive to changes in price, usually due to substitutes being available.
Price elasticity of demand (PED) measures the extent to 
which demand for a product changes due to a change in its price.
Price elasticity of supply (PES) measures the degree of 
responsiveness of the quantity supplied of a product following a change in its price.
Price inelastic demand describes demand for a product that 
is unresponsive to changes in price, mainly because of the lack of substitutes for the product.
Price makers are firms that set their own price as they have 
the market power to do so, rather than having to base their price on the equilibrium price determined by the forces of demand and supply.
Price mechanism refers to the system of relying on the 
market forces of demand and supply to allocate resources.
Price takers are firms that set their price according to the 
market price, rather than determining their own prices.
Private benefits are the benefits of production and 
consumption enjoyed by a firm, individual or government.
Private costs of production and consumption are the actual 
costs of a firm, individual or government.
Private sector refers to economic activity of private 
individuals and firms. The private sector’s main aim is to earn profit for its owners.
Privatisation is the transfer of the ownership of assets from 
the public sector to the private sector.
Production refers to the total output of goods and services in 
the production process.
Production possibility curve (PPC) represents the maximum 
combination of goods and services which can be produced in an economy, i.e. the productive capacity of the economy.
Productivity is a measure of efficiency found by calculating 
the amount of output per unit of a factor input, e.g. output per worker or output per machine hour.
Profit  is the difference between a firm’s total revenues and 
its total costs. It is calculated using the formula: TR − TC.
Protection refers to the use of trade barriers to restrain 
foreign trade, thereby limiting overseas competition.Public goods are goods and services that are non-excludable 
and non-rivalrous, and which are a cause of market failure as there is a lack of a profit motive to produce them.
Public sector refers to economic activity directly involving 
the government, such as the provision of state education and healthcare services. The public sector’s main aim is to provide a service.
Real GDP refers to the value of national income (GDP) 
adjusted for inflation to reflect the true value of goods and services produced in a given year.
Recession occurs in the business cycle when there is a fall in 
GDP for two consecutive quarters.
Redistribution of income refers to the macroeconomic aim 
of achieving greater equality in the distribution of income in an economy.
Relative poverty is a comparative measure of poverty, 
referring to those who have a lower standard of living in comparison to the average member of society.
Replacement fertility rate is the number of children that the 
average woman must have to maintain a stable population size.Replacement fertility rate is the number of children that the 
average woman must have to maintain a stable population size.
Revaluation occurs when the price of a currency operating in 
a fixed exchange rate system is officially and deliberately increased.
Sales revenue (or total revenue) is the sum of money 
received from the sale of a good or service. It is calculated by the formula: P × Q.
Saving occurs when a person puts away part of their current 
income for future spending.
Services are non-physical items such as haircuts, bus 
journeys, telephone calls and internet access.
Shortage occurs when demand exceeds supply because the 
price is lower than the market equilibrium.
Social benefits are the true (or full) benefits of consumption 
or production, i.e. the sum of private benefits and external benefits.
Social costs are the true (or full) costs of consumption or 
production to society as a whole, i.e. the sum of private costs and external costs.
Specialisation of labour refers to workers being expert in a 
particular profession.
Standard of living refers to the social and economic 
wellbeing of individuals in a country at a particular point in time.
Stocks (or inventories) are the raw materials, components 
and finished goods (ready for sale) used in the production process.
Structural unemployment occurs when the demand for 
products produced in a particular industry continually falls, often due to foreign competition.
Subsidy is a form of government financial assistance to help 
cut production costs of domestic firms, enabling them to compete against foreign producers.
Substitutes are goods or services that can be used instead of 
each other, e.g. tea or coffee. 
Supply is the ability and willingness of firms to provide goods 
and services at given price levels.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   300 12/02/18   9:57 AM301Supply of labour refers to everyone in an economy who is 
of working age and is both willing and able to work at 
different wage rates.
Supply-side policies are long-term measures to increase the 
productive capacity of the economy, leading to an outward shift of the production possibility curve.
Surplus is created when supply exceeds demand because the 
price is higher than the market equilibrium price.
Takeover  occurs when a firm is taken over by another firm. A 
takeover may be hostile or the two firms might have agreed to the takeover.
Tariff is a tax on imports, which increases production costs 
for foreign firms.
Tax is a government levy on income or expenditure.
Tax avoidance is the legal act of minimising payment of 
taxes, such as by avoiding spending on items with a large sales tax.
Tax evasion is the illegal act of not paying the correct 
amount of tax, perhaps due to a firm under-declaring its corporate profits.
Total cost is the sum of all fixed and variable costs of 
production.
Total revenue is the amount payable to a firm from the sale 
of its goods and services. 
Trade union is an organisation which aims to protect the 
interests of its worker members, i.e. their terms and conditions of employment, including pay.Trading bloc is a free trade area which also promotes the 
free movement of factors of production between member countries.
Unemployment occurs when people of working age are both 
willing and able to work but cannot find employment.
Unemployment rate is a measure of the percentage of a 
country’s workforce that is out of employment.
Unitary price elasticity occurs when the percentage change 
in the quantity demanded (or supplied) is proportional to the change in the price, so there is no change in the sales revenue.
Variable costs are those that change as the level of output 
changes. The higher the level of production, the greater the total variable costs will be.
Vertical merger occurs when integration takes place between 
two firms from different economic sectors of industry.
Wage–price spiral occurs when trade unions negotiate higher 
wages to keep income in line with inflation but this simply causes more inflation as firms raise prices to maintain their profit margins.
Wants are goods and services that are not necessary for 
survival but are demanded by economic agents to fulfil their desires.
Working population refers to the active labour force  
aged 15–65, i.e. those who are willing and able to work. This consists of those in paid employment, the self-employed and the unemployed.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   301 12/02/18   9:57 AM302Acknowledgements
Photos reproduced by permission of: p.1 incamerastock/Alamy Stock Photo; 
p.4 littleny/Fotolia; p.6 tl Lefebvre/Fotolia, tr lnzyx/Fotolia, bl Kadmy/Fotolia, br lnzyx/Fotolia; p.7 Ian Shaw/Alamy Stock Photo; p.19 David Wall/Alamy Stock Photo; p.20 Kristoffer Tripplaar/Alamy Stock Photo; p.21 Geoffrey Robinson/Alamy Stock Photo; p.25 Tupungato/Fotolia; p.29 Helix/Fotolia; p.32 FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP/Getty Images; p.46 Reuters/Corbis; p.47 ckchiu/Fotolia; p.48 So-Shan Au; p.51 Imaginechina/Corbis; p. 53 Koichi Kamoshida/Getty Images; p.55 So-Shan Au; p.60 Urbanmyth/Alamy Stock Photo; p.63 Paul Hoang; p.65 John Powell/Rex Features; p.68 Jim Holden/Alamy Stock Photo; p.71 t Gerald Herbert/AP/PA Images; b Rodrigo Baleia/LatinContent/Getty Images; p.78 Ruben Pinto/Fotolia; p.79 WILLIAM WEST/AFP/Getty Images; p.82 Paul Hoang; p.85 Craig McAteer/Alamy Stock Photo; p.87 So-Shan Au; p.88 tl Photodisc/Getty Images; b Lou-Foto/Alamy Stock Photo; p.89 Mary Evans/Alamy Stock Photo; p.94 eillen1981/Fotolia; p.96 So-Shan Au; p.99 Chien Min Chung/Corbis; p.101 Katia Torralba/www.katiatorralba.com; p.103 Darby Sawchuk/Alamy Stock Photo; p.104 Vesna Cvorovic/Fotolia; p.105 Justin Kase z12z/Alamy Stock Photo; p.109 Margaret Ducie; p.111 Ben Chams/Fotolia; p.118 l Kumar Sriskandan/Alamy Stock Photo; r Sergio Azenha/Alamy Stock Photo; p.119 Imagestate Media (John Foxx); p.121 Joel Ryan/AP/PA Images; p.126 Jerome Favre/Corbis; p.130 Mar Photographics/Alamy Stock Photo; p.133 RichardBaker/Alamy Stock Photo; p.135 Paul Sakuma/AP/PA Images; p.136 l PA Archive/PA Images; r Chris Ratcliffe/Getty Images; p.137 l imageBROKER/Alamy Stock Photo; r Dario Pignatelli/Getty Images; p.138 So-Shan Au; p.139 Kevin Lau Photography/Getty Images; p.146 Emma Wood/Alamy Stock Photo; p.147 Paul Hoang; p.148 JAVIER SORANO/AFP/Getty Images; p.149 Monty Rakusen/Corbis; p.153 lightpoet/Fotolia; p.158 So-Shan Au; p.159 Business Wire/Getty Images; p.162 So-Shan Au; p.164 Sebastian Kahnert/PA Images; p.165 CTK/Alamy Stock Photo; p.169 Neil Juggins//Alamy Stock Photo; p.170 Almas/Fotolia; p.174 IanDagnall Computing/Alamy Stock Photo; p.179 Stocktrek Images, Inc./Alamy Stock Photo; p.185 kanvag/Fotolia; p.187 aquatarkus/Fotolia; p.189 Oliver Dixon/Alamy Stock Photo; p.190 digitallife/Alamy Stock Photo; p.193 Adrian Sherratt/Alamy Stock Photo; p.202 Christopher Furlong/Getty Images; p.204 Eric Isselée/Fotolia; p.208 moodboard/Corbis; p.209 Yi chang/Imaginechina/Corbis; p.221 Cathy Yeulet/123RF; p.224 Walter Bibikow/Getty; p.229 Simon Lowthian/Alamy Stock Photo; p.243 2007 Digital Vision/photolibrary.com; p.245 YOSHIKAZU TSUNO/AFP/Getty Images; p.247 lulu/Fotolia; p.250 WANG ZHAO/AFP/Getty Images; p.261 Megapress/Alamy Stock Photo; p.262 Hero Images Inc./Alamy Stock Photo; p.263 vivien/Fotolia; p.265 Barry Turner/Alamy Stock Photo; p.266 Everett Collection Inc/Alamy Stock Photo; p.268 Brent Lewin/Getty Images; p.270 ALBERT GEA/AFP/Getty Images; p.273 Hu wencheng/Imaginechina/Corbis; p.274 Nikolai Sorokin/Fotolia; p.275 Cyberstock/Alamy Stock Photo; p.277 Richard Wood/Alamy Stock Photo; p.280 SAJJAD HUSSAIN/AFP/Getty Images; p.284 KIMIMASA MAYAMA/epa/Corbis; p.289 Barry Iverson/Alamy Stock Photo.
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   302 12/02/18   9:57 AM303Index
Note: bold page numbers indicate where definitions of key terms are to be found.
A
absolute poverty  236
advertising
and barriers to entry  165–66and demand  29discouraging smoking  79economies of scale in  141and price elasticity of demand  51–52promoting healthy eating  80
age of a person
and poverty  238and savings level  103and spending level  101and wages potential  114
age distribution  248–49ageing population  208, 245, 248, 251allocation of resources  19–83
demand  28–33macro- and microeconomics  20–23market economic system  63–66market failure  67–72mixed economic system  73–83price changes  42–45price determination  39–41price elasticity of demand  46–56price elasticity of supply  57–62role of markets  24–27supply  34–38
appreciation (of a currency)  278
and exchange rate fluctuations  281
average fixed cost (AFC)  156average revenue (AR)  158average total cost (ATC)  157average variable cost (AVC)  157
B
backward-bending supply of labour  
curve  112
backward vertical mergers  137bad debts  106balanced budget  178balance of payments  175, 284
current account  284–90stability, policies to achieve  188, 191, 
196, 290–91
bank bailouts  81, 92bank deposits  86, 93bankers’ bank, central bank function  91banking  90–95
central banks  90–92commercial banks  92–94
bankruptcies and deflation  224bargaining power of workers  114–15barriers to entry  162
deregulation removing  195monopoly markets  165–66barriers to trade  271–74bartering  89–90base year  219basic economic problem  2
economic goods and free goods  4factors of production  6–10finite resources and unlimited  
wants  2–3
opportunity cost  11–13production possibility curve  14–17
benign (non-threatening) deflation   
217, 224
birth rate  243–44, 246borrowing  104
by a country  288deflation increasing real costs of  224effect of inflation on  223factors affecting level of  105–06interest rates determining cost of  100reasons for  97
brand loyalty  51–52budget deficit  178budget surplus  178business cycle  199–200
C
capital expenditure  97capital, factor of production  6, 145capital-intensive production  149–50
versus labour-intensive production  
150–51
capital productivity  151cash  86cash reserve, banks  91, 105central banks  90
central bank reserves  86, 189functions of  90–91and quantitative easing  191
certainty, taxation principle  184chain of production  130–31choice and competitive markets  163claimant count  209collateral  106collective bargaining  124, 125commercial banks  92–93
functions of  93–94
competition
and free trade  270impact on market price and output  163and rate of productivity growth  153wasteful  65
competitive markets  162–64competitiveness
effect of protectionist measures on  291and productivity  152and specialisation  264, 265
complements  29confidence levels
and consumer spending  100–01deflation causing fall in  225and economic recession  191–92inflation affecting employers  224and level of borrowing  105and level of saving  103
conglomerate mergers  139–40conspicuous consumption  99Consumer Price Index (CPI)  218
calculating  219–20
consumer spending  96–102consumption (C)  198
and calculation of GDP  199
contractionary fiscal policy  186, 187contractionary monetary policy  190contraction in demand  30contraction in supply  35convenience, taxation principle  184corporate social responsibility (CSR)  127corruption as a cause of poverty  240cost of labour versus cost of capital  
110–11, 150
cost of living
and geographical mobility  8, 113and inflation  216, 220
cost-push inflation  220–21costs of production  155
average costs  156–57effect of changes in output  157effect on supply curve  35fixed costs  155private and social costs  67–68total cost  156variable costs  155–56
craft unions  124credit card borrowing  105–06credit items, balance of payments  175current account  284
primary income  285secondary income  285trade in goods  284trade in services  285
current account deficit  287
causes of  287consequences of  287–88primary income  285secondary income  285trade in goods  284trade in services  285
current account deficit  287
causes of  287consequences of  287–88
current account surplus  287
causes of  289consequences of  289–90
current expenditure  97cyclical unemployment  211
D
death rate  244, 246debit items, balance of payments  175debt see also government debt
household  104–06, 223
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   303 16/02/18   2:45 PM304debt effect  224
deficit
budget  178current account  286–88trade  288
deflation  217
causes of  217consequences of  224–25policies to control  226
demand  28, 28–33
conditions of  31–32individual and market  30–31non-price determinants of  28–29price and  30
demand-deficient unemployment  211demand for labour  110
factors influencing  110–11
demand-pull inflation  221demerger  142demerit goods  70demographics  248dependency ratio  249dependent population  249depreciation (of a currency)  278
and exchange rate fluctuations  281
deregulation  195derived demand  110, 145devaluation  279direct provision of goods and services  
81–82
direct taxation  180
effects of lowering  194, 195
diseconomies of scale  142–43
and costs of production  157
disposable income  96
Japan and USA  98
distribution of income/wealth see 
redistribution of income/wealth
divisibility of money  88division of labour  120double coincidence of wants  89dumping  273
anti-dumping tariffs, China  274
durability
of banknotes and coins  87of products and price elasticity of 
demand  52
E
earnings see also wage levels
 reasons for differences in  116–19
economic agents  2economical, taxation principle  183economic development  254
country differences  254–59living standards  230–34population  243–53poverty  235–42
economic freedom  64economic goods  4economic growth  173, 198
causes and consequences of  201–04and confidence about the future  101fiscal policy  187impact of taxation  184and living standards  230macroeconomic aim of government   
173
measurement of  198–99monetary policy measures  191negative consequences of  203–04policies to promote  204positive consequences of  202–03and productivity  152role in poverty alleviation  240supply-side policy measures  196versus balance of payments stability  176versus stable prices  176
economic systems  63
market system  63–66mixed system  73–83
economies of scale  140–42
cost of production and changes in 
output  157
free trade benefits  270and labour productivity  151–52monopoly market structure  166specialisation advantages  264
education
attainment-earnings correlation  
114–15, 233
to correct market failure  79–80HDI (Human Development Index) 
indicator  231
indicator of economic development  257investment in, supply-side policy   
194, 213
and job choice  109and poverty alleviation  241and unemployment rate  115
effective demand  28efficiency
and free trade  270of market economies  64of specialisation  264taxation principle  184
embargo  272employees see workersemployers see firmsemployment  206 see also full 
employment; unemployment
changing patterns and levels of  207–08created by a current account surplus  
289
and economic growth  202fiscal policy  187incentives for long-term unemployed  
214
measuring  208–10
enterprise, factor of production  145enterprise zones, investment in  195entrepreneurs  8, 153entry barriers  149, 162, 165, 167environmental issues
caused by market economic system  65and economic growth  203, 204effects of population size  252Paris Agreement (2016), climate  
change  171
plastic use, ways of reducing  185
equilibrium price  39
causes of price changes  42–43
equilibrium wage rate  114equitable (fair), taxation principle  183excess demand  39excess supply  40exchange rate  276
causes of fluctuations in  279–80consequences of fluctuations in  281–82determination of  277systems: fixed and floating  278–79
expansionary fiscal policy  186, 187expansionary monetary policy  190export earnings (X)  199exports  269
and current account deficits  287and current account surpluses  289effect of inflation on  223, 279and exchange rate  277, 281–82,  
288, 290
invisible  285lower demand for  287visible  284
extension in demand  30extension in supply  35external benefits  68external costs  67–68external economies of scale  141external growth  135–36
F
factor endowments  201factor immobility and market failure  
70–71
factors of production  6–7F
factor endowments  201factor immobility and market failure  
70–71
factors of production  6–7
demands for  145–46ease and cost of substitution  61immobility and market failure  70–71mobility of  8–9quantity and quality  9–10rewards for  7
fashions, effect on demand  28–29, 51female participation rate  208fertility rate  244
and optimum population  246–47
financial economies of scale  140firms  130–44
classification of  130–32costs of production  155–58economic sector  130–31economies and diseconomies of scale  
140–43
external growth of  135–36impact of industrial action on  125inflation harming  224internal growth of  134–35mergers  136–40objectives of  123, 158–60population trends  251
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   304 12/02/18   9:57 AM305private versus public sector  131
production  145–54size of  132small firms  132–34specialisation by  262–63
fiscal policy  186
classification of taxes  180–83contractionary  186–87effect on government’s macroeconomic 
aims  187–88
expansionary  186, 187government budget  178impact of taxation  184–85and inflation control  226principles of taxation  183–84reasons for government spending  179reasons for taxation  179–80and redistribution of income/wealth  
187, 188
unemployment reduction  213
fixed costs  155
average fixed cost  156and total cost  156
fixed exchange rate system  278–79flexibility, taxation principle  184flexible working patterns  208floating exchange rate system  278foreign direct investment (FDI)  239,  
255, 280
foreign exchange market  278foreign exchange rates  276–83formal sector employment  208forward vertical mergers  138franchise  136freedom
of choice  64economic freedom  64Human Freedom Index  233
free goods  4free trade  269
benefits of  269–70
frictional unemployment  211fringe benefits  108, 109full employment  207
macroeconomic aim of government  
173–74
and monetary policy  191supply-side policy measures  196versus balance of payments  
stability  176
versus stable prices  176
G
GDP per head  199
and economic development  254–55low wages and poverty  237–38and optimum population  246–47population growth limiting  255richest and poorest countries  235standard of living indicator  230–31
gender distribution  248gender pay gap  118–19general price level see inflationgeneral unions  124geographical mobility  8
immobility causing market failure  71and supply of labour  113
globalisation  267goods  3
trade in  284
government budget  178government debt
cause of poverty  239consequence of deflation  224most and least indebted countries  239privatisation reducing  81unemployment increasing  212
government intervention  76–82
direct provision  81–82education  79–80in the foreign exchange market  280indirect taxation  76–77nationalisation  81privatisation  80–81and protectionism  274rules and regulations  78–79subsidies  77
government and the macro economy  
169–227
economic growth  198–205employment and unemployment  
206–15
fiscal policy  178–88inflation and deflation  216–27macroeconomic aims of government  
173–77
monetary policy  189–92role of government  170–72supply-side policy  193–97
government policies  170–71 see also 
fiscal policy; monetary policy;  supply-side policy
to achieve balance of payments  
stability  290–91
to alleviate poverty and redistribute 
income  240–41
to control inflation and deflation  226and demand  29to promote economic growth  204raising retirement age  251to reduce unemployment  212–14wage determination  115–16
government role  170–72
international role  171–72local role  170national role  170–71redistribution of income  232
government’s bank, central bank  
function  91
government spending (G)  178
component of nominal GDP  199and economic growth  198, 199and fiscal policy  186–87, 204, 213, 226and government debt  224reasons for  179US federal government  11
gross domestic product (GDP)  198
GDP per head/per capita  199nominal GDP, calculation of  198–99real GDP  199
growth of firms
business objective  158causes of  134–36
H
habits and demand  28, 51healthcare
economic development indicator  
257–58
HDI (Human Development Index) 
indicator  231
and poverty  238
homogeneous products  163horizontal mergers  136–37households  96–107
borrowing by  104–06saving by  102–03spending by  96–102
household spending  96–102human capital (skills and experiences of 
workers) see also education
and productivity growth  153
Human Development Index (HDI)  231–32Human Freedom Index  233hyperinflation  216
in Zimbabwe  88, 216
I
illness and poverty  238immobility of factors of production  70–71imperfect knowledge  165, 167imported inflation  221import expenditure (M)  199import quotas  271–72imports  269I
illness and poverty  238immobility of factors of production  70–71imperfect knowledge  165, 167imported inflation  221import expenditure (M)  199import quotas  271–72imports  269
causing inflation  223and current account deficit  287and exchange rates  277, 279, 281, 290invisible  285protectionism  273, 274visible  284
incentives
market economies  64supply-side policies  195, 214
income see also national income
and demand  29and economic development  254–55effect of inflation  223effect on savings  103HDI (Human Development Index) 
indicator  231
and household spending  96–100inequalities  65, 203and price elasticity of demand  51rewards for factors of production  7
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   305 12/02/18   9:57 AM306income distribution  232–33
income inequalities  65, 175, 203income redistribution  175–76
fiscal policy  187, 188and living standards  233macroeconomic aim of government  
175–76
policies  240–41policies aimed at  240–41role of taxation  185supply-side measures  196
income tax (a direct tax)  96, 180
formal sector employment  208and incentives  184, 195and location of MNCs  184–85progressive taxation  181of selected countries  194and wealth redistribution  185, 196
income threshold  236indirect taxes  76–77, 180
effects of lowering  195
industrial action  125industrial unions  124inequalities in income and wealth  65,  
175, 203
infant industries  273inflation  216
consequences of  222–24and consumer spending  101and cost of living  233cost-push  176, 220–21and current account surplus  290demand-pull  176, 203, 221economic growth drawback  203eroding value of GDP  231and exchange rate fluctuations   
280, 282
and full employment  176government’s aim of low  174–75impact of taxation on  185imported  221measuring  218–20policies to control  226
infrastructure and poverty  238–39innovation  153
effect on supply of a product  35and rate of productivity growth  153
inorganic growth  135–36instability and poverty  240interdependence  130
and globalisation  267
interest rates  100
and borrowing levels  104, 105effect of cutting  176effect on savings  103and household spending  100influencing investment expenditure  153monetary policy  171, 189–92, 204, 213and speculation  280
internal economies of scale  140internal growth  134–35international specialisation  263international trade  269international trade and globalisation  
261–92
current account of balance of payments  
284–92
foreign exchange rates  276–83free trade  269–71globalisation  267–69international specialisation  262–66protection  271–74
inventories  60investment expenditure (I)  198
and differences in economic 
development  256–57
and economic growth  187, 191, 196, 
201–02
by the government  199and rate of productivity growth  153supply-side policies  195, 196, 213, 291
investment income (primary income)  285invisible balance  285invisible exports and imports  285
J
job satisfaction  109
L
labour costs
compared to cost of capital  150and demand for labour  110–11financial payment methods  108and specialisation  265–66
labour, factor of production  6, 7, 145labour force see also workers
and economic growth  201
labour force participation rate  112labour force survey (LFS)  209labour-intensive production  147–49
reasons for using  151
labour market reforms  194labour mobility, and specialisation  265labour productivity  151
and demand for workers  110and economic growth  201
labour supply curve  111–12labour turnover and overspecialisation  
265
land, factor of production  6, 7, 145law of demand  28law of supply  35legislation  78lender of last resort, central bank 
function  91
life expectancy  238, 257, 258literacy and poverty  238living standards  230–34
factors causing differences in  232–33indicators of  230–32
loans see borrowinglocation of a business
and economies of scale  141impact of taxation  184–85
loose monetary policy  190M
macroeconomic aims of government  
173–77
balance of payments stability  175conflicts between  176economic growth  173fiscal policy effects  187–88full employment/low unemployment  
173–74
monetary policy effects  191redistribution of income  175–76stable prices/low inflation  174–75supply-side policy effects  196
macroeconomics  21
decision makers in  22
malign deflation  217, 224managerial economies of scale  140market capitalisation  132market demand  30–31market disequilibrium  24, 39
creating shortages and surpluses  39–40
market economic system  63–66
advantages of  64disadvantages of  65
market equilibrium  24, 39 see also 
equilibrium price
diagrammatic representation  39
market failure  67
causes and consequences of  69–71government intervention to correct  
76–82market equilibrium  24, 39 see also 
equilibrium price
diagrammatic representation  39
market failure  67
causes and consequences of  69–71government intervention to correct  
76–82
private and social benefits  68private and social costs  67–68
marketing economies of scale  141market share  132market structure  162
competitive markets  162–64monopoly markets  164–67
market supply  36market system  24
decisions about resource allocation  
25–26
maximum prices  74–75medium of exchange
credit cards as  94money as  86
mergers  135
conglomerate  139–40horizontal  136–37unsuccessful  142vertical  137–38
merit goods  69–70microeconomic decision makers  21–22, 
85–168
firms  130–44firms’ costs, revenue and objectives  
155–61
firms and production  145–54households  96–107markets  162–68money and banking  86–95trade unions  123–29workers  108–22
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   306 12/02/18   9:57 AM307microeconomics  20
minimum prices  75–76minimum wage  115–16, 241mixed economic system  63, 73–83
government intervention  76–82maximum and minimum prices  74–78
mobility of factors of production  8–9, 
70–71, 113, 201
monetary policy  189–90
and balance of payments stability  
290–91
effects on macroeconomic aims  191and inflation control  226limitations of  191–92promoting economic growth  204three main measures of  190unemployment reduction  213
money  86
characteristics of  87–90forms of  86functions of  86–87
money supply  189monopoly markets  164
advantages and disadvantages  166–67characteristics  164–65and market failure  70
multinational corporations (MNCs)  267
costs and benefits  268–69
N
national income
and cyclical unemployment  211and deflation  217, 224and differences in economic 
development  254–55
distribution of  233and inflation  221living standards indicator  231real GDP and GDP per head  199
nationalisation  81national minimum wage (NMW)  115
effect on labour market  75–76and poverty alleviation  241
natural resources
effect of population growth  251, 252‘land’ factor of production  6, 7, 145
necessity and PED  51needs  3negative equity  99, 100net exports  199net income transfers  285net migration rate  244, 246nominal gross domestic product (nominal 
GDP)  198
non-tariff barriers  271non-wage factors affecting choice of 
occupation  109
O
objectives of firms  158–60
and capital- versus labour-intensive 
production  150occupation
and differences in earnings  116–18factors affecting choice of  108–09
occupational mobility  8
immobility causing market failure  71of labour and capital  61and supply of labour  113
occupation and earnings  116–18opportunity cost  11
effect on supply of a product  35influence on decision making  12–13
optimum population  246organic growth  134–35output per worker (labour productivity)  
110, 151, 152, 201
over-population  247overspecialisation  265
P
per capita GDP  199perfectly price elastic
demand  49, 50supply  58, 59
perfectly price inelastic
demand  49, 50supply  58, 59
pester power  65planned economy  63population  243
distribution  248–50optimum  246–47
population distribution  248
effects on the economy  251–52
population growth  243, 250–51
country differences, reasons for  244–46economic consequences of  251and economic development  255factors affecting  243–44and poverty  238
population pyramids  248–49portability of money  88–89positive wealth effect  99poverty  235
absolute poverty  236causes of  237–40policies to alleviate  240–41relative poverty  236–37
poverty line  236PPC diagram  14price changes  42–45price control  74–76price and demand  30price determination  39–41
market disequilibrium  39–40market equilibrium  39
price discrimination  55price elastic demand  46price elasticity of demand (PED)  46
calculation of  47–48and demand curve diagrams  48–50determinants of  51–53implications for decision making  55and total revenue  53–54price elasticity of supply (PES)  57
calculation of  57–60determinants of  60–61significance for decision makers  61–62
price index  218–20price inelastic demand  46price makers  (price setters)  164price mechanism  26price and supply  35–36price takers  163primary income  285primary sector  130, 256
poverty associated with reliance on  240worker differences  118
‘principles of taxation’  183–84private benefits  68private costs  67private sector  2, 63, 131
goal of profit maximisation  160versus public sector workers  119
privatisation  80
advantages  81disadvantages  81supply-side policies  195
product differentiation  163production  151
capital-intensive and labour-intensive  
146–51
production see also factors of production
resource allocation decisions  25–26versus productivity  152
production costs  155–57
effect of changes in output on  157effect on supply of a product  35protection increasing  274
production possibility curve (PPC)  14production costs  155–57
effect of changes in output on  157effect on supply of a product  35protection increasing  274
production possibility curve (PPC)  14
diagrams  14–15and economic growth  173, 198and higher productivity  151–52shifts and movements along  15–16and specialisation  264supply-side policies  193
productivity  151
country differences  255and economic development  255importance of higher  151–52influences on  153and living standards  232versus production  152
profit  7, 53, 159
calculation of  159and productivity  152
profit maximisation, business objective  
159, 160
progressive taxation  181–82, 241proportional taxation  182–83protection (trade)  271
arguments for and against  273–74methods of  271–72unemployment reduction measures  213
public debt see government debtpublic goods  69
direct provision of  81–82
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   307 12/02/18   9:57 AM308public sector  2, 63, 131
versus private sector workers  119
purchasing (bulk-buying) economies of 
scale  140
pure monopoly  164
Q
quantitative easing  191
quantity demanded  28, 30, 31
and price elasticity of demand  46, 
48–50
quantity and quality of factors of 
production, causes of changes  in  9–10
quantity supplied  35–37
and price elasticity of supply  57–59
quotas on imports  271–72
R
real GDP (per capita)  199
and economic development  254–55measure of economic growth  198–99standard of living indicator  230–31
recession  200
causes and consequences of  199–200deflation associated with  217
redistribution of income/wealth  175
fiscal policy  187, 188and living standards  233macroeconomic aim of government  
175–76
policies  240–41role of taxation  185supply-side measures  196
reforms, labour market  194regional differences in income  233regressive taxation  182regulations
to correct market failure  78–79deregulation of markets  195trade protection   272
relative poverty  236–37rent (reward for land)  7replacement fertility rate  244resource allocation see allocation of 
resources
revaluation  279revenue
calculation of  158sales revenue  53–54, 132, 158total revenue  53, 158
risk-bearing economies of scale  141salaries see wage levels
S
sales revenue (total revenue)  53, 158
and relative size of firms  132
sales taxes  55, 180, 182, 194
impact on price changes  42, 184
saving(s)  102
and economic development  256–57effect of inflation on  222factors influencing  102–03of low, middle and high income  
groups  97
typical Canadian household  97
scarcity of money  88secondary income  285secondary sector  130, 240, 256
country differences  256worker differences  118
sectors of production/output  240, 256
changing employment patterns  207firms classified by  130–31worker differences  118
services  3
trade in  285
shoe leather costs  222shortages  39size of firms  132size of households  102skilled labour/workers
external economies of scale  141and improved productivity  153, 264labour-intensive production  151versus unskilled, wage differences  
116–18
slogans (catchphrases)  163small firms  132–33
advantages of  134challenges facing  134
social behaviour, taxes altering  185social benefits  68social costs  67social hardship, market economies  65social welfare, business objective  158sole issuer of banknotes and coins, 
central bank  91
sole supplier, monopoly as  164sole trader/sole proprietor  133, 134specialisation at a national level  262–66
advantages of  264disadvantages of  265
specialisation of labour  120speculation  280spillover effects  67, 69, 70stable prices (low inflation)
fiscal policy  187macroeconomic aim of government  
174–75
standard of deferred payment, money 
function  87
standard of living  230
current account deficit lowering  288current account surplus improving  289and economic freedom of a  
country  64
economic growth improving  202and income distribution  232–34indicators of  230–32
state benefits see welfare benefitsstocks (inventories)  60store cards, borrowing encouraged  
by  106
store of value, money function  86strikes  125, 126–27, 128structural unemployment  211subsidies  272
and correction of market failure  77for investment in enterprise zones  195and level of supply of a product  35
substitutes  29
and price elasticity of demand  46, 49, 51
supply  34
conditions of  36–37determinants of  34–35individual and market  36and price  35–36
supply of labour  111–12
and earnings differences  117, 120–21and equilibrium wage rate  114factors determining  112–13and population distribution  251
supply-side policy  193
to achieve balance of payments  
stability  291
deregulation  195and economic growth  204education and training  194effects on macroeconomic aims  196and inflation  226investment incentives  195labour market reforms  194lower direct taxes  194measures used  194–95privatisation  195unemployment reduction  213–14work incentives  195
surplus  40
on the current account  289–90surplus  40
on the current account  289–90
survival, business objective  158Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  
171, 237
switching costs, PED  52
T
takeovers  135tariffs  271
and trade disputes  274
tax  179
effect on supply of a product  35
taxation
direct  180–81, 194impact of  184–85indirect  76–77, 180–81principles of  183–84progressive  181–82proportional  182–83reasons for  179–80regressive  182
tax burden  180tax evasion  185tax revenues  178
and economic growth  202
technical economies of scale  140, 149–50technology  110–11tertiary education and delay in entering 
workforce  208
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   308 12/02/18   9:57 AM309tertiary sector  130, 240, 256
country differences  256
worker differences  118
tight monetary policy  190time
effect on supply of a product  34and price elasticity of demand  52and price elasticity of supply  61
total cost (TC)  156
average total cost  157and profit  159
total revenue (TR)  53, 158trade barriers  271–74trade cycle  199–200trade in goods  284trade in services  285trade unions  123
advantages and disadvantages  128–29collective bargaining and wage  
claims  125
factors influencing strength of  127–28and industrial action  125–26reduction in power of  214roles and responsibilities of  124–25types of  124
trading bloc  171training see educationtransport networks  141–42trends  98–99, 199–200
U
UN Declaration of Human Rights  123under-population  246–47unemployment  173, 206
causes and types of  211–12consequences of  212due to current account deficits  288due to deflation  224measuring  208–09and the national minimum wage  116policies to reduce  212–14and poverty  237
unemployment rate  209
calculation of  174, 209countries with highest  212and level of education  115Portugal (2007–17)  207Spain and Greece  211
uniformity of money  88unit of account, money function  86unitary price elasticity  49
of demand  49, 50of supply  58, 59
V
value measure, function of money  86variable costs  155–56
average variable cost  157
vertical mergers  137–38visible balance  284visible exports and imports  284W
wage determination  110–16
demand for labour  110–11equilibrium wage rate  114government policy: minimum  
wage  115–16
relative bargaining power  114–15supply of labour  111–13
wage factors and choice of  
occupation  108
wage levels
differences between sectors  118gender differences  118–19minimum wage  115–16, 241and poverty  237–38private versus public sector  
differences  119
and productivity  152skilled versus unskilled workers  
116–18
wage-price spiral  224wants  3wealth  99
inequalities  65, 203and level of borrowing  106and level of saving  103regional disparities  233taxes redistributing  185, 187world’s richest people  175
wealth effect  99, 224weather
effect on supply of a product  35impact on agricultural output  42, 265
weighted price index  219–20welfare benefits
provision of  241reduction of, supply-side policies  214and the supply of labour  112
‘white collar’ unions  124workers  108–22
aims and objectives  123differences in earnings  116–19division of labour  120financial rewards and occupational 
choice  108
non-wage factors and occupational 
choice  109
specialisation of labour  120–21wage determination  110–16
work incentives, direct tax cuts  194, 195working population  249work-to-rule  125
421271_IGCSE_Economics_2e_Glossary.indd   309 12/02/18   9:57 AM